---
title: "Church in a World Gone Mad - Titus 1_1-4"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
Well, please find your way in your Bible to the letter of Paul to Titus. Paul's letter to Titus in chapter 1. You'll find Titus, if you've not been there in a while, just after 1 and 2 Timothy, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Timothy, Titus. If you get as far as Hebrews, you missed Philemon and Titus. So we're starting a new series today. 

We're going to be working through the book, the letter of Titus, and I want to read the whole of chapter 1, although my focus today is just going to be in the first four verses. Follow along with me if you will in Titus chapter 1. I'm going to be reading from the Legacy Standard Bible. Adam came back from Shepherds Conference and gave me a shiny new Bible, and my Bible is much in need of rebinding. So for the study in Titus, I'm going to be preaching from the Legacy Standard Bible. 

Hopefully that's what's on the screen. If not, they'll get that fixed by next week. But it's not that dissimilar from the New American Standard translation. It's based on the New American Standard translation. It's a new translation with that as its basis. 

So Titus chapter 1 begins, Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ for the faith of God's elect and the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness, in the hope of eternal life, which the God who cannot lie promised from all eternity, but at the proper time manifested his word in preaching, with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior. To Titus, my genuine child, according to our common faith, grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior. For this reason I left you in Crete that you would set in order what remains and appoint elders in every city as I directed you. Namely, if any man is beyond reproach, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, who are not accused of dissipation or rebellious, for the overseer must be beyond reproach as God's steward, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not addicted to wine, not pugnacious, not fond of dishonest gain, but hospitable, loving what is good, sensible, righteous, holy, self-controlled, holding fast the faithful word, which is in accordance with the teaching, so that he will be able both to exhort in sound doctrine and to reprove those who contradict. For there are many rebellious men, empty talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, who must be silenced because they are upsetting whole families, teaching things they should not teach for the sake of dishonest gain. 

One of themselves, a prophet of their own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons. This testimony is true. For this reason, reprove them severely so that they may be sound in the faith. Without paying attention to Jewish myths and commandments of men who turn away from the truth, to the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, but both their mind and their conscience are defiled. They profess to know God, but by their works they deny Him, being detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work. 

Well, let's pray. Our Father in heaven, as we open a new book in the Bible and begin a study in it, we realize that once again we are incredibly privileged. What an amazing blessing, Father, to have Your Word in our hands, to have it open in front of us, to have it preached to us week in, week out. And Lord, we pray that You would have mercy upon us because we realize that we're also capable of even treating lightly the blessing that You give us. So Father, forgive us our sins. 

Please have mercy upon us. You know our frame. You know that we're just dust. Please be patient with us and help us and teach us again. Lead us in the truth. 

Correct us. Instruct us. But Lord, enable us by the power of the Holy Spirit to change in response to Your Word. Give us grace to respond, grace to obey, courage to follow the Word simply put in front of us. We pray for that accuracy of interpretation and accuracy of explanation. 

We pray that You would be pleased with everything that is said and done as we study this book, and that we would be changed. Help us to focus on the things that You would have us focus on. And so bless us we pray in Jesus' name. Amen. Well, talking about focus, what would the apostle Paul say if he were to write a letter to Grace Life London? Can you imagine that? Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, to the saints in Grace Life London, I would love to read that letter. 

You could ask the question another way, what would the Holy Spirit have us focus on as a church at the moment? Now that's an interesting question, isn't it? That's the kind of question that we ask as pastors when we're thinking about which part of God's revealed Word, because in case you were getting nervous, I'm not about to give you new revelation. We have the revelation of God, and there's a whole variety of truth in this book and a variety of emphases in different parts of Scripture. And one of the questions we ask as we're especially finishing up one book and thinking about what to do next is what would the Holy Spirit have us focus on? And we pray about that. I've been thinking long and hard about what to preach next at the end of the study through Daniel, and I really do want to get back into Genesis. Those of you who've been at Grace Life London for long enough remember that we were working through Genesis, and then life happened and we got to responding to life, and that's necessary sometimes. 

That took us into Daniel because the focus in Daniel was different and helpful for us, I hope, as we've worked through that over the last year or so. But now what next? It's very tempting for me to think in terms of how do we respond to the current crisis that's going on in the world, the war in Ukraine, and the political changes that are happening. If you're following the news, you may be aware that around the world there are changes taking place in the political realm which have massive implications for us in the future. We definitely live in interesting times, don't we? It's very tempting to focus on that. It's very interesting, however, to think about the fact that the New Testament was also written to people who were living in very interesting times. 

That's an understatement. We can actually get distracted, can I say this to you, this morning it's possible to get distracted from what God would have us focus on by continually focusing on the changing events that are taking place in this world. I think at the moment the changes are coming so thick and so fast we could do nothing else than focus on reacting, but that's not what the authors of the New Testament did. It's actually helpful if you study a bit of history as I've been doing this week, the history of the world that was taking place whilst the New Testament was being written. You get this very powerful impression that they lived in very turbulent times. 

Paul for instance wrote this letter to Titus somewhere in the region of AD 62 to AD 64 and Nero was the emperor during those years. They were mad times. There was no shortage of persecution for the church. The church was undergoing terrible persecution you could say. James the brother of Jesus by all accounts had been martyred around that time. 

Some say Mark also had just been killed. That's Mark who wrote Mark's gospel. They had plenty of political intrigue and changes going on. Nero had just murdered his mother a few years before. Then Nero's mentor in AD 62, his mentor was called Burus. 

His mentor had been the, he was the prefect of the Praetorian Guard in Rome. He had been a very stabilizing restraint on the madness of Nero the emperor. Then Burus died. The other stabilizing influence on Nero, the philosopher Seneca who was his, again a kind of a mentor, a restrainer to the madness of Nero. He went into semi-retirement. 

He wanted to retire. Nero wouldn't let him but back and forth he went off and left Rome and was out of the picture and Nero went mad you would say. He turned into a megalomaniac that we remember him for. He became the kind of guy that makes the Marvel villains, some of them look sane. I mean this was an emperor who ruled by murder, by deceit, with sexual perversion beyond our understanding and then there was war. 

The Parthians, that's the Iranians had just invaded Armenia in the north and of course here in Britain this was the time AD 60, 6061 was when the queen of the Icenes, Bodica launched her rebellion and we booted out the Romans and every Brit says hurrah. The one time we did boot out somebody invaded us. We didn't get rid of them completely and Bodica by all accounts died but there was a successful rebellion and it was a moment of glory in Britain but it wasn't a moment of calm in the Roman Empire. I mean these were crazy times. All this just to say there was a lot going on during this period. 

AD 64 at the end of this time when this letter to Titus was being written was when Rome was burned and Nero blamed the Christians and the Christians were being crucified beyond our comprehension, 2000 in one day. They were crucified and burned on crosses to light the way around the city and you just can't imagine the persecution and the trouble during this time and yet when Paul writes this letter to Titus, if you're looking for political commentary, if you're looking for someone to kind of focus on what's going on in the world, you're like where is it? I mean Paul's writing to Titus and nothing of that is the focus in this letter. So what did the Holy Spirit, and here's a good question, what did the Holy Spirit want the churches in Crete to focus on? What did the Holy Spirit inspire Paul to write to Titus to have him instruct the churches in Crete about so that they could know what to do in a time like that, in a mad, mad world? If you can see the title of this sermon it's called Church in a World Gone Mad. You feel like the world is going mad? Okay. How do we do church? What do we need to focus on in the church in a world that's gone mad? Well one thing is obvious by its absence. 

God didn't want Titus and God didn't want the churches and God doesn't want us to focus on putting the world in order. That's not our job. You can search the New Testament and despite all the mess in the world during those early years you will not find one letter in the New Testament focusing on sorting out the world. Maybe it'll come as a shock to some of you but actually the Bible views the world as doomed. No, don't go running out, clutching your head, shouting we're all doomed. 

That's not going to help anyone. But the Bible views the world as doomed. Jesus is coming, he's coming with fire and judgment, he's coming to wipe out this present existence and in the meantime before Jesus comes we're waiting for an Antichrist to be revealed. There is going to be one. Can I use the word hell in that sense of a mess metaphorically? There is going to be one diabolical mess in this world and then Jesus is going to come and clear it all up. 

We're not going to take over. We don't get to win. We don't get to fix this world in the meantime. See in the meantime the Bible's assessment of what the problem is in this world is really stark isn't it? Not just the world is doomed but people are doomed. Paul wrote about people being under the wrath of God and basically waiting for judgment. 

And what's the church supposed to be doing in a time like this? Well the church is supposed to be a light in a dark place right? The church is supposed to be a lighthouse bringing people to safety. The church is supposed to be a beacon of hope and Christians are supposed to shine as lights in the world right? Jesus said that. It's true that we're supposed to be salt and light. Yes Christians are supposed to have a preserving influence as well as an illuminating influence. That's true. 

But I go back to what I said. Obviously the focus in the New Testament is on churches being fixed not on the world being fixed. What's our focus supposed to be? What's the focus in Titus all about? Actually it's really interesting. God inspired Paul to write to Titus and look at verse 5. He spells out his purpose in leaving Titus on Crete and he spells out his purpose really for I believe for the whole of this letter in this one verse in verse 5. 

For this reason I left you in Crete that you would set in order what remains and appoint elders in every city as I directed you. Now this is very interesting because I believe you can break that into two and you can say that first of all after that statement Paul spends the rest of chapter 1 talking about appointing elders in every city and why that's necessary. And so he deals with the second part of the statement first in chapter 1 and then in chapter 2 and 3 he talks about setting order what remains. You could outline the book like that that Paul is first of all saying you guys are going to need to appoint elders in the church and let me tell you how to do that. And secondly he's saying there's a lot of stuff out of order. 

There's a lot of disorder. There's a lot of we would say chaos that comes into the church from the culture. All these people saved and where are they saved from? Being lost. What were they like when they were lost? Rebellious wandering sheep. We all like sheep who have gone astray. 

That's every Christian in this room. If you're not yet a Christian we all like sheep who have gone astray. Each of us has turned to his own way. What's our hope? The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. You can be saved from your sin and you're wandering through Jesus. 

Praise the Lord. Turn to him. Repent. He'll save you. But when we're saved and brought into the church we still carry a lot of baggage with us. 

We're still messed up and we carry all sorts of ways of doing things that bring chaos into the church. And what's the job now for us as the church? How are we going to shine as a light in the world? We got to sort out the chaos in the church. And that's what Paul is writing to Titus to tell him to do in the churches in Crete. He's saying you're going to need elders. You're going to need to sort out the mess. 

So that's kind of what we're going to be focusing on in this series through Titus. We're going to be looking, we need to appoint elders as a church, don't we? We've got these offsite advisory elders in America which have been with us for 10 years. Praise God for that help. We need elders among our own congregation for the long term and we need to be sending out church plants and giving them elders as we send them out. And so we're going to have to look at this business of appointing elders and this will be helpful for us. 

But we've also got to sort out whatever disorder remains in us. And praise God this study in Titus will give us the opportunity to focus on doing that and to focus on doing that so that we can shine as a light in the world and a beacon of hope. So that we can live lives, the kind of Christian lives that you know you should be living. And so people look at you and say, well, what's the reason for the hope that you have? Okay, that's what we're doing here. By the way, our study in elders and the qualifications for elders is going to give us a benchmark, you would say, for all of us in our Christian lives. 

This is going to be intensely practical. So let's not miss this. Now this is all by way of introduction. I want to get into all of that in the future. But for today, I just want to set up our whole time in Titus briefly by working through the first four verses of this letter. 

Today I want to show you two claims that you have to accept in order to get the benefit of this letter in the 21st century. Now obviously the letter, this is basic hermeneutics, the letter wasn't written to us. Who was it written to? To Titus. That's verse five, right? Verse four, sorry. This is a personal letter written from the apostle Paul to Titus. 

But before you discard that, it was preserved and recorded in the Bible for us, right? So this is not to us, but it is for us. And I think most likely it was also read in the churches in Crete. But even if it wasn't addressed to them, it was probably read there because it was preserved and distributed around the New Testament world to all the churches. And look, as the churches in Crete were listening into this letter being read, and as Christians today, you listen into this letter being read, there are two claims that are implied in the first four verses. I think that have to really strike you. 

They would have struck those early listeners. And I'm saying you today, if you're going to get the benefit of this book, you have to accept these two claims. So if you're taking notes, the first claim is a claim of benign authority, benign authority. In verses one to three, you can see that Paul claims to have a benign authority. He doesn't call it that, but I'm calling it that. 

And I'm saying you have to accept this benign authority, benign authority to be sorting out the church if you're going to benefit from this letter. Look at how Paul introduces himself. Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ. Slave, slave. I mean, slave is about as low as you can go, isn't it? It's actually a good translation of the Greek word doulos here. 

How would you feel about introducing yourself as a slave of God? Can you see yourself at work? Can you imagine this playing out, that moment at work where everyone's introducing themselves? Say something about yourself that helps define you to everyone in the room. And somebody says, I'm this, and I have this identity, and my pronoun preferred is this. And it comes around to you. Can you imagine I'm a slave of God? What about putting that on your business card? What about as the tagline on your emails? Your name, slave of God. All right, it's kind of shocking today, isn't it? But they had slaves in Rome and they were the underclass, you would say, or they could rise to positions of great power and importance, but they were not freed men. 

And they were not Roman citizens. They were slaves. They were the class of slaves. And Paul introduces himself here. Now, they put their introductions at the beginning. 

They didn't have a tagline at the end of their emails. They put it all up top. And Paul says, Paul, a slave of God. This is the most, this is not pride. This is the most humble introduction you could give yourself. 

Same time he doesn't hide his authority, does he? He goes straight on, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ. Now, the apostles, get this, the apostles were eyewitnesses to the resurrection of Jesus. And they were people who were especially commissioned by Jesus to be entrusted with his message. They had a sacred commission by Jesus from God. You must bear witness to me. 

You get to carry my message with you. And Paul was effectively saying here, I've been picked out by the son of God, Jesus, to be a witness to his resurrection. And he was writing with this apostolic authority. By the way, nobody today has that authority. No one. 

If anyone today says they're an apostle, you might want to politely point them to the reality that 1 Corinthians 15 verse 8, Paul said he was the last of the apostles. These biblical apostles, by the way, nobody after the New Testament came to an end, used that term apostle in normal life because they all kind of saw the reality that yes, in the Bible, some individuals are called apostles, we would say with a small a, and these were apostles with a capital A. But after the Bible era came to a close, everyone recognized that the 12 and Paul were just in a category apart from anyone else. And so they stopped calling people, generally they stopped calling people apostles. So that term dropped out of use. 

Apostle in that sense could just be, with a small a, could just be translated as messenger as it is later in this, as it is elsewhere. Sorry, I'll point to it later. The biblical apostles with a capital A, we would say, had the authority in their day to say, we've received revelation directly from Jesus Christ. And we say to you, this is it, you have to believe it, because we're the appointed persons with this message. And that's a whole load of authority, isn't it? But it is actually a benign authority here. 

What do I mean by benign? I mean it was an authority for their good, not a harmful or abusive authority. And a lot of people have been burned, haven't they, by abusive authority. Just look at the next phrase when Paul explains what his apostleship is for. This is verse one continuing with the word for. For the faith of God's elect and the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness. 

Now what I mean is this authority is for the purpose of making sure that God's elect, God's chosen ones have the faith that they need. And also the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness, verse one. And this authority, you could say, is so that they can have, verse two, look at it, the hope of eternal life, which the God who cannot lie promised from all eternity. It's a package deal here. It's a package deal in which the faith and the full knowledge of the truth are all bound up in the hope of eternal life in this verse. 

My point here is just to say we get to see that Paul's apostolic authority is genuinely for their benefit. And that's really good, isn't it? If an authority is, if you have someone who has authority but it's for you, not abusively against you, that's a really good authority. We all, by the way, like to have people in authority who are on our side, who are for us, who are working for our benefit, not harming us by that authority. There's even more here. Even the knowledge of the truth and the hope of eternal life that comes with it comes to us through the word of God, right? And the word needs to be preached by faithful men, correct? And Paul here is saying that he, yes, he's a slave of God, but he is an apostle. 

And that I'm quoting, at the proper time, look at verse 3, at the proper time, he's still talking about the God who cannot lie, so we could say, God manifested his word in preaching. God made his word, that's the gospel message and the whole of his word, he made his word manifest. That's clear. That's explained. That's presented openly, manifest by what? Preaching. 

And this preaching, says Paul, is the preaching with which I was entrusted, this is verse 3, according to the commandment of God our savior. I mean, this is great. According to Paul, what Paul's saying here is, I have been entrusted with this message, which is for you, for the benefit of your faith, so you can have a hope of eternal life and all that. This is an incredible authority and a trust that I've been given, but it's on your behalf. Now, I'm saying this, and I've gone off on that, but what I'm saying is this, if we're going to get the benefit from this letter, if you're going to get the benefit from this letter, you have to accept this authority. 

You have to accept it is a benign authority, but you have to accept it. Paul's saying, I'm an apostle, I got this preaching from God, and we've got it written in the word, you have to believe this is from God, don't you? Otherwise, you can't really take the instruction that's coming in this letter, and there is a lot of it to come, and some of it's going to sting. As our friend says, if you can't say amen, just say ouch, but you have to say ouch and then say amen, you can't say ouch and no thank you. This is not an optional message for us, it comes with authority, it comes with the authority of the divine word of God. So it's a benign authority, it's not an abusive authority, and let's back up again and just say we do recognise that some people have a problem with authority, and some people have a problem with authority because they've been burned by abusive authority, and I want to say to you, if that's you, there is benign authority, it does exist, and you need it, friend. 

You desperately need it in your life. If you go from being burned by authority, abusive authority, to rejecting authority, you've gone out of the frying pan into the fire. This is a disaster for your life. We all need benign authority, and here it is, praise God. I don't have this authority, but I can point you to this authority and I will, as faithfully as I can. 

And I can say this is what God says, and we can talk about whether the Bible is truly inspired, we can talk about that, we can talk about whether it's truly accurate, we can talk about that if you have problems with that, there's lots of help there, but you need to know that benign authority exists, and it's here for you, and you have to accept that if you're going to benefit from this letter, that's my point. It's an implicit claim here, and we have to accept it to move on. Let me say this to someone else in the room. There are some people who struggle with authority, not because they've been burned by it, they just don't like it. They just want to do. 

. . I talk to people like this from time to time, and I say, God says, and they say, but I think. I'm like, did you just realize you just equated yourself with God? And of course, they do and they don't. In their own mind, they're like, well, what I think counts, doesn't it? No. 

What I think doesn't count. I'm not here to give you my opinions. If I'm here to give you my opinions, just leave. You'd be better off going. You can get opinions down the pub. 

But if you want the word of God, you got to have someone who's willing to say, it's not what I think, it's what this Bible says. Our job is to get as close to what this Bible says as possible. We know we fail, but we want to be saying faithfully, this is what the Bible says. If you have a problem with that, you have a problem, right? Your problem is if you're fighting that kind of authority, you find out you're fighting God. Let me just say, are you even saved? Fundamental issue for rebels coming to the Bible is that the Bible doesn't allow you to be a rebel. 

The Bible says repent. The Bible says you have to submit yourself to God. It's the message that says you're a sinner. I'm a sinner, you're a sinner. But it says you're a sinner who needs to repent. 

You're a rebel who needs to stop rebelling and listen to God and start saying, God, what you say I'll do. That's the fundamental commitment of every Christian. Jesus is what? Lord. If you didn't come to Jesus saying, Jesus, I give in, I submit, you are Lord, what you say counts from here on, I am your follower. You're not his advisor. 

I am your follower. If you come to church to be able to just talk to people about your opinions, are you even a Christian? We come to hear from God, right? We come to receive what God has given. That's me and that's you. So there we go, a little slap in the face for you rebels. We need to move on though, don't we? Because there's more here. 

There's a second claim. That's a claim to benign authority. Now there's a second claim about an exceptional role, an exceptional role. You have to accept the exceptional role that leaders have in sorting out the church. This is verse four. 

Leaders have an exceptional role. Paul wrote this letter to Titus, to Titus, my genuine child according to our common faith, grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Savior. And yes, that was by the way, a version of the typical greeting in that day, but Paul adapted it and changed it. And yes, grace and peace is a normal greeting, but boy, oh boy, Titus was going to need all the grace and all the peace. And by the way, do you pray for your leaders? This is a good little side application. 

Do you pray for your leaders like this, that they would know grace and peace? We need it. Do you pray for those who are helping you in some shape or form like Titus was helping Paul? Do you long and pray for them to have grace and peace? This is a biblical greeting, but it's a biblical prayer. It's a biblical desire, grace and peace to you. May the Lord bless you with grace and peace. This isn't not just a throwaway comment. 

It's a prayer, isn't it? And we should pray like this for each other and for our leaders and this is what leaders need. It's what those who help us need and so on. We could just, we could camp on that, but I want to camp on this, that the letter is written to Titus, to Titus. He didn't write it, notice this, he didn't write the letter to sort out the church straight to the whole congregation. And you say, why not? Well actually it was multiple congregations. 

This is one of the pastoral letters. It's written to Titus and he was Paul's helper and he was there on Crete and the big problem in the church is that on Crete they didn't have leaders yet and they needed elders to be appointed, but they had Titus and he was the leader. Now just a little note, Paul didn't see the churches in Crete as mini democracies. He didn't write to the churches in Crete and say, look, you've all got problems. You've got these issues in your culture, in your society. 

You've brought those into the church. Now it just would be really nice what I'd like for you all to do. It's amazing what we achieve if we can just come together and all be nice. Would you just all please be nice to each other and if we work together we can do anything. That's what Walt Disney would have written to the churches in Crete, but it wasn't what Paul wrote. 

He didn't also say, guys, it's time to have elections. We need to have elections. We need you to vote, all of you, for the most attractive, the tallest, the most godly, the most qualified person you can see. He didn't even say that to the churches. Now there's going to be implications for the churches when it comes to appointing leaders, but he wrote to Titus and gave Titus a really exceptional role. 

I mean, Titus is a leader of leaders, you would say, in this stage in church history. He has all these churches and none of them have got elders and he's got this job and it's an exceptional role, but can you imagine how Paul writing to Titus with all this authority and saying, Titus, this is what I want you to do and I want you to do this for the churches in Crete, can you imagine how that would have rubbed some people up the wrong way? I mean, Titus, he's not from around here. He doesn't even speak with our accent. He's not even circumcised. Actually you'll find out later in this letter that there were some problems in the churches in Crete from the circumcision party and we'll learn about Titus that he wasn't circumcised. 

He was a Greek convert to Christianity. But Paul wrote to Titus and he expected Titus to appoint elders and he expected Titus to set people straight where they were going wrong. He gave an exceptional role to this leader and later we're going to see that elders are other leaders and they have exceptional roles. I'm just making a general point at the moment without getting into the specifics of Titus himself and his role. I'm just saying you have to accept an exceptional role if you're going to get the benefit from this book. 

Well, it's not because every Christian can't be engaged in some of the kind of work that leaders are told to do. I mean, when Paul wrote to the Romans, Romans 15 and verse 14, he said he was perfectly satisfied that they were, and I quote, able to instruct one another. That's Romans 15, 14 if you want to look it up. Jay Adams, by the way, wrote an excellent book. He translated it, competent to counsel in this verse. 

And that's a fantastic book. Believers with the Holy Spirit in you and the word of God informing you are capable of counseling one another, competent to counsel one another in the work, in the knowledge that you have received from God. And actually we're told to admonish one another, we're told to encourage one another, we're told to exhort one another. We're told even to correct people when they've gone wrong, to instruct people where they go astray. So in as much as you know you're supposed to be instructing each other, does that make you an appointed teacher in the church? No it does not. 

We're told to admonish one another, but does that make you the person who's got the responsibility for handling all of the discipline issues in the church? No it does not. There are exceptional roles for leaders, and I'm just pointing out the fact here at the beginning of Titus that Paul gave Titus an exceptional role. Later he's going to outline an exceptional role for elders, and you've got to be okay with that, you've got to accept that if you're going to get the benefit from this letter. If we miss that we end up in all sorts of mess. I think it's helpful because in Titus we get Paul giving Titus what he needed to know to be able to fulfill his mission. 

These letters, one and two Timothy and Titus are often called pastoral epistles, and it's superb material both for leaders and for congregations to learn about leadership. I probably ought to tell you something a little bit about Titus thing as we're getting into this book, and then I'll come back to conclude in a few minutes. We'll just try to wrap this up briefly, but Paul calls Titus here in verse four, my genuine child according to our common faith. That's quite possibly because Titus was saved under Paul's ministry. Titus has been helping Paul for quite a long time now. 

If you cast your mind back in New Testament history to the Jerusalem council, that's in Acts chapter 15, that was about AD 49. Remember when they had to sort out that question about whether Gentile converts needed to be circumcised? Paul was there and Peter was there and James was there and the apostles gathered and they had this big council and they brought out this issue and they settled it and then they sent messengers around with Paul and Silas after that point. They went out and they brought the message to all the churches, no, this is what you have to do, you Gentile converts, but you don't have to be circumcised. In Galatians chapter two and verse three, Paul says about Titus that even Titus who was with me, he says, even Titus was not compelled to be circumcised though he was a Greek. That's really helpful little bit of information on Titus and you say, well, when was that? That was AD 49 and this is AD 62 to 64. 

Let's just guess how old was Titus? We don't know, maybe a young man, let's say 25 there. He's at least 40ish now. If he was 30, he'd be 45 now and this is a big job, isn't it? Titus, you're on Crete and there are all these churches and it's your job to appoint elders and sort out the chaos, the disorder that remains in these churches. Wow, that's quite a job, isn't it? Would you want the job? That's actually an exceptional role as Titus thankfully was an exceptional person. I'll just tell you a little bit more about Titus. 

If you want to have a look quickly at 2 Corinthians chapter 7, 2 Corinthians chapter 7, in verses 5 to 7, you can see how Titus visited Corinth. This is a fascinating story in the life of Paul. I can't go into it, but Paul had written a severe letter to the Corinthians and was very concerned about their response to that letter, whether they would repent or not. It was kind of a make or break situation with the Corinthian church. They'd been responding very badly. 

Paul had to write this really severe letter that he mentions in 2 Corinthians and he was really distressed about their response to it. He says in verse 5, even when we came into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were afflicted on every side, conflicts without, fears within. His fears were to do with the church in Corinth. But God who comforts the humbled, comforted us by the coming of Titus and not only by his coming, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you as he reported to us your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me so that I rejoice even more. Now let me just give you the picture. 

So Titus visited Corinth on behalf of Paul when Paul couldn't bear to go. Paul was depressed in his mind, worried about this church in Corinth that he'd invested so much in and it was about to explode. He'd written them this letter. Now Titus is the man who goes and visits and until Paul hears from Titus, he's just like, oh, I can't bear it. He can't even rest. 

And then Titus comes, but now get this, Titus comforted Paul with the report from Corinth, but even more than the report from Corinth, Paul was comforted by the comfort with which Titus was comforted. You're like, okay, this is too many comforted by for me to take in in one minute. Just let me explain it to you like this. Titus visited Corinth, Titus saw that genuine repentance, Titus was moved by that. I mean, Titus was a guy who was just, this wasn't his church. 

These were not his, this was not his congregation. And he had a concern for the wellbeing of the people of God so that he was distressed when they were not obeying the Lord. But when he saw their repentance, Titus was comforted. Titus was the guy who couldn't sleep at night because of the situation in Corinth, but Titus was comforted. And when he came back and saw the apostle Paul, he was able to comfort the apostle Paul because Paul could see how comforted he was. 

This is an, I guess we would say in modern terminology, he was an empath. He could feel other people's problems and he rejoiced when they were right with God. This is good, isn't it? I like Titus. We could go on to chapter eight in two Corinthians, verse six, we encouraged Titus as he had previously made a beginning. So also he would complete in you this gracious work as well. 

He's talking about Titus having made a beginning to raise funds among the Corinthians and the churches in Macedonia to send relief down to Jerusalem where the saints were starving. And then in verse 16 in chapter eight in two Corinthians, thanks be to God who puts the same earnestness on your behalf in the heart of Titus. See that earnestness on behalf of the Corinthians in the heart of Titus for he not only accepted our plea, but being himself very earnest, he has gone out to you of his own accord and we have sent along with him the brother whose praise and it goes on to talking about this unnamed brother. And what do you see in verse 16 and 17? You see Titus earnest for the Corinthians and taking initiative on behalf of the Corinthians. He's quite a leader. 

And then you could skip down to verse 23. As for Titus, this is Paul bragging on this man who's his helper in the missionary work. As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker among you. He has a lot of regard for Titus, doesn't he? And you say Titus has an exceptional character. Yeah. 

Titus has an exceptional role. Yes. He does. And you've got to be willing to accept that. If you're willing to receive the instruction in this book, why? Can you imagine again, put yourself back in the position of the churches in Crete and along comes Titus. 

And what do they know about Titus? Oh, he's Paul's man. And now he's telling us all what we're supposed to be doing. What do you need if you're one of them to be able to receive that? You need to be able to accept, don't you? First of all, this comes with an authority from God. The apostle Paul, but it's a benign authority. It's for our good. 

Okay, we can accept Titus. We can accept his instruction because it comes with a benign authority. You also have to be able to accept the reality that God gives certain people exceptional roles. And that's Titus in this case. And it's going to be elders. 

And you've got to be okay with that. Can you put yourself in the position of one of the grumblers? There are always grumblers, aren't there? Can you put yourself in the position of one of the grumblers? Who's Titus? He's not circumcised. He's not from around here. What does he know that we don't know? Why is he always just seems to just say what it is? I mean, don't our opinions count? Can you hear that? I can hear it. Let me say this. 

You grumblers, I'm speaking to you, you grumblers are not the leaders in the church. You got to accept that. Get over it. God has an exceptional role for leaders. Boy, oh boy, is it an exceptional role. 

It comes with accountability. It comes with qualifications. It is the kind of role that makes a man who understands it tremble, believe me. But just because you grumble doesn't make you a leader. So stop it. 

According to the inspired apostle, it's the God given leader here in you churches in Crete that has to appoint leaders, not you. And that rubs people up the wrong way, doesn't it? Especially in an age which is almost deified democracy. Have you followed what's going along in the political world at the moment and the accolades given to the Ukrainian president Zelensky defending democracy on behalf of us all, fighting for democracy? Democracy is almost like the new God. All right. I think it's the best political system out there. 

I think it's better than the alternatives that are out there in the world, but it still has its problems. And by the way, God did not give democracy to churches. God gives leaders to churches and he expects leaders to lead. He expects leaders to appoint leaders even. Does that mean the congregation is bypassed? No. 

We are going to be going through it at great length with you because you have to be involved. We need to appoint leaders, but we as elders need to appoint the leaders. That's our job. And if we're going to do it right, you need to be involved. You need to understand what's going on. 

You need to be holding the leaders accountable to the qualifications and so on. This involves all of us, but there is an exceptional role for leaders and you've got to accept that. Okay. Have I made the point? Those are just two, we would say two derived principles that you have to accept in order to get the benefit of this epistle to Titus. So I'm hoping that that will be of help. 

If you understand Hebrews 13, 17, obey your leaders and submit to them. They keep watch over your souls as those who will give an account so that they will do this with joy and not with groaning for this would be unprofitable for you. You understand the need to accept the role of leaders and not to be fighting God on that issue. So there we go. Two claims that are implied in these opening four verses, the benign authority and the exceptional role. 

Now, next week, look at verse five briefly. We're going to get into this next week and we'll look at verses 10 to the end of the chapter. We're going to skip next week the, we're going to skip the bit which is in the middle, which we will be spending a lot of time on. But next week I want to show you really something of the need for leaders. And we'll look at the situation in the churches in Crete and we're going to see boy oh boy do we need godly leaders. 

Well, that's for next week. Father, we pray that you would help us as we begin our study through this wonderful epistle and we pray that you teach us and lead us in the truth. It help us to be Bereans and bless us. We pray with not just the information but the ability, Lord, we pray to apply it and to personalize it in Jesus name. Amen. 

. 