---
title: "Elders, and Why You Need Them - Titus 1_5, 10-11"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
 Well, if you would find your way in your Bible, please, to Paul's letter to Titus. Letter to Titus, chapter one. We're just getting started in our new series, working through this letter to Titus from the Apostle Paul. Today I want to pick up our study in verse five, and I'm going to spend almost all my time in verse five on just giving you an understanding of one word. And then we'll come back to verses 10 and 11 a little bit at the end, but we're going to need to understand this. 

I want to give you the context again. I'm going to read the whole of chapter one to you. Because we're going to be studying this chapter for a while, I want you to get very familiar with it. I'm reading to you, by the way, from the Legacy Standard Bible. Someone asked me earlier whether we'd made the transition to the Legacy Standard Bible as a church, and the answer to that is no. 

I am reading to you from the Legacy Standard Bible because I have a shiny new Bible that Adam gave me when he got back from Shepherds Conference, and my old Bible desperately needs rebinding. But I'm going to read to you from this, and we're going to be preaching from this during the book of Titus. Any long-term decisions about which Bible we use as a church will be made carefully, not in a moment. So, Titus chapter one, and beginning to read at verse one. Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, for the faith of God's elect and the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness, in the hope of eternal life, which the God who cannot lie promised from all eternity, but at the proper time manifested his word in preaching, with which I was entrusted, according to the commandment of God our Saviour, to Titus, my genuine child according to our common faith, grace and peace from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Saviour. 

For this reason I left you in Crete, that you would set in order what remains and appoint elders in every city as I directed you. Namely, if any man is beyond reproach, the husband of one wife, having faithful children, who are not accused of dissipation or rebellious, for the overseer must be beyond reproach as God's steward, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not addicted to wine, not pugnacious, not fond of dishonest gain, but hospitable, loving what is good, sensible, righteous, holy, self-controlled, holding fast the faithful word which is in accordance with the teaching, so that he will be able both to exhort in sound doctrine and to reprove those who contradict. For there are many rebellious men, empty talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, who must be silenced because they are upsetting whole families, teaching things they should not teach for the sake of dishonest gain. One of themselves, a prophet of their own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy clutters. This testimony is true. 

For this reason, reprove them severely, so that they may be sound in the faith, not paying attention to Jewish myths and commandments of men who turn away from the truth, to the pure, all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure, both their mind and their conscience are defiled. They profess to know God, but by their works, they deny him, being detestable, disobedient and unfit for any good work. Well, let's pray. Father in heaven, as we open up your word, we pray that you, living God, would be glorified. We pray that we would be edified. 

Please build us up in our faith, Lord. You are the one who has said, you prayed, Lord Jesus, sanctify us by your truth. Your word is truth. And so, we pray that that prayer would be answered today, as we come before your word. Please give us the power of the Holy Spirit, both to explain, to understand, to clearly grapple with the truth of your word. 

And we ask you that we as a church may be formed, and that we as individuals may be formed and reformed and molded according to your word. Please teach us and lead us in the truth. And we ask it for Jesus' sake. Amen. Well, I'd like to point you back again to verse 5 as we begin. 

You'll notice in Titus chapter 1 and verse 5 that Paul left Titus on the island of Crete, so that he would, and I quote, set in order what remains. And, no, there's a twofold purpose. And appoint elders in every city. Now, I mentioned last week, it's worth mentioning again, that I believe this verse gives us something of an outline for the whole of the book of Titus, for the whole of Paul's letter to Titus. Because immediately after saying this, Paul jumps into giving Titus a whole list of qualifications for elders to help him with the business of appointing elders, which he's just told him is what he's got to do. 

And he's going to go through that, we're going to go through all of that in chapter 1. But then when he gets to the end of that in chapter 2 and on into chapter 3, he's busy in the rest of the letter really telling Titus, you could say, how to set things in order in the churches in Crete, set in order what remains. And so I'm saying as I read Titus, I see Titus 1 and chapter 5 as kind of a way that you can understand where Paul is going with this whole letter. I guess it'll be helpful for us today as we're looking at the second part of that statement in verse 5. You know, in the second part of the statement, he says, appoint elders in every city, and that's going to be the subject for the rest of chapter 1. 

It'll be helpful for us today before we get into the whole matter of qualifications for elders and the business of appointing elders. It'll be helpful to stop for a minute and just ask some basic questions about elders. So today is going to be more of a topical study, trying to make sure that we're all able to answer those basic questions, that we're all on the same page. I mean, churches today have strayed far, far from the biblical standard of what an elder is, what an elder should be. What the Bible teaches about elders is really muddied by all kinds of strange teachings that people come up with, but also all kinds of traditions that churches accumulate and don't necessarily realize are unbiblical. 

And, well, churches drift, don't they, away from the Bible. That's kind of a standard direction for sinful people to just gradually drift away from the Bible. And we need the Bible taught to us accurately and faithfully to constantly be bringing us back to the basic truth that's on the page. And so we all need this, don't we? But there are also people who today who would believe, either in practice or actually they would even teach, that the church doesn't need elders. The title for my sermon then today is, Elders and Why You Need Them. 

I'm really just going to be asking and answering two very basic questions about elders from the Bible. Topically, we would say I'm going to be going to a number of texts. I'm starting in verse five with this word elders, and I'm going to be asking two very basic questions about it and going to the whole Bible to answer those questions topically, so that we're all on the same page as we come to our study in Titus about elders. Is that okay? So if you're taking notes, we'll be working through two basic questions about elders to set us up for our study in Titus. The first question is the most basic of all, and it's the question, what are elders? What are elders? That's really basic, isn't it? Well, let's start with first of all, what they're not. 

What are elders not? And I'll give you this straight off the bat. Elders are not priests. Elders are not priests. You do not need another priest. A priest, you know a priest is a mediator. 

Remember that helpful illustration which I've given a number of times. What is a prophet? A prophet is someone who stands as it were with his back to God to speak to people on behalf of God. A priest is someone who as it were turns his back to the people to mediate, to speak to God on behalf of the people. So a priest is a mediator. A priest is a mediator and according to the Bible, Jesus is the only mediator we need. 

Now this is straight from the Bible, 1 Timothy chapter 2 verse 5, and I quote, for there is, those of you who know it can say it with me, for there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. You need to know that verse. Not many of you seem to know it. Come on. For there is one God and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. 

Why is that so important to know you will have Roman Catholic friends, some of you from Roman Catholic backgrounds, some of you have Roman Catholic family. The Roman Catholic Church is very explicit in teaching that the role of a priest in the Roman Catholic Church is as a mediator between you and God. So instead of Christ as your mediator, you end up with a mere man who's not even married, doesn't know how to run a family, a mere man as your mediator between you and God. And if you say, well, I've got Jesus as my mediator and I can, well, I can have a priest as well, can't I? Well, I'm just going to take you back to that verse, 1 Timothy chapter 2 verse 5, and we'll do some basic mathematics, okay? Just you and me, for those of you who struggle at this level, the rest of us are not listening. But so 1 plus something else equals more than 1, right? Okay. 

But the Bible says there is one God and how many mediators? One mediator between God and man. So if you add another mediator, you've got more than one mediator, and you're now officially unbiblical, right? Okay, good, as long as we're with each other on that basic level, we can proceed. So you don't need another priest, do you? You don't need it. No matter what the Roman Catholic Church says, no matter what the priest says, no matter what the Pope says, the Bible says you don't need another priest. So don't go to a priest. 

By the way, the Bible never, never ever calls any official in the church in the New Testament with the term priest, never. And that's because priests in the Old Testament, well, they were the mediator between the people and God. They were the people who offered sacrifices to God on behalf of the people. You took your sacrifice to the priest, it was killed, and then the priest went and presented it to God. This was your intercession for God so that you would have atonement and be forgiven. 

You went confessing your sin, but you confessed it, and the priest kind of came between you and God to do the work for you. Now, this is very, very helpful, Hebrews chapter 10. You need to know this as well. Hebrews chapter 10 and verse 10 says that as Christians, we've been made holy in the sense of sanctified permanently. And I quote, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, now listen to this, once for all. 

Hebrews 10, 12, couple of verses on, talks about the fact that Jesus offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins. So let's get this straight. You do not need a priest to mediate for you and make another sacrifice for you, which is what the Roman Catholic Church teaches about the Eucharist or the Lord's Supper or the Mass as they call it, and the Lord's Table as we call it. Let me just say this straight up again. The Lord's Table, we're going to celebrate it afterwards. 

It is not another sacrifice of Jesus. There's one sacrifice. Did you notice that? As a great high priest, Jesus offered for all time a single sacrifice for sins. And we eat and we drink to remember his sacrifice. That's what he taught, not to re-sacrifice him. 

And so the one priest we need has come and he's made the one sacrifice we need. And all you need to do, let's just say this, this is so helpful. All you need to do is to repent now. You can do this now. You can repent and put all your faith in what Jesus did on the cross 2,000 years ago, the one sacrifice for all times, for all time. 

And guess what? If your faith is in that, if you're repenting and trusting in that, that's it. You're forgiven. It's done. Everything is done. There is no more to do. 

The priest has come. The sacrifice has been made. You don't need another priest. Okay. Elders are not priests. 

Did I kill that one? Good. Elders are also not vickers. We're just doing a couple of things that elders are not to get this cleared up. I was brought up in the Church of England, not the Roman Catholic Church, but it wasn't much better. My village, we had a vicar. 

What's a vicar, by the way? The word vicar comes from the Latin word vicarius. And according to one dictionary definition of a vicar, the word vicar means a representative, a deputy or substitute, anyone acting in the person of or agent for a superior. Now, that's interesting, isn't it? Because it's helpful to understand that in the Church of England, a vicar is the representative of the bishop in your particular little locality in my village, in my case. And the bishop is kind of, well, he's a super vicar, I guess. He's kind of like a higher version. 

And there's this hierarchy. Then you have the top, you've got the archbishop, and then there's the archbishop of Canterbury, and he's at the head. And anyway, by the way, you don't find any of that in the Bible, none of that hierarchy ever appears in the Bible. You don't have bishops and then archbishops or vicars, and then bishops above them. The Roman Catholic Church, interestingly, the pope is called officially the vicar of Christ, which is, if you stop to think about it, the one who stands in for the representative of Christ, the representative, that's quite the astonishing claim, isn't it? Astonishingly unbiblical, I'm going to say. 

But let me reassure you about this. I'm an elder in this church, and I ain't nobody's vicar. You know, perhaps, that we planted this church, we were commissioned, I was ordained in Grace Community Church by the elders there, and we came as a church plant from Grace Community Church, where John MacArthur is the teaching pastor there. And you probably want to know that I'm not the vicar of John MacArthur. I don't stand here to tell you, I don't stand here on his behalf to tell you to be his representative here. 

Both John MacArthur and the Master's Seminary, where I was trained, teach a view of church government that's taken from the Bible that says churches are independent and are governed by a group of elders. And the elders are not vicars of another church, they're not vicars of another individual. I mean, it's Grace Community Church and John MacArthur, they've been incredibly, incredibly generous to us. They've supported us and helped us and have been friends to us throughout. You could say we wouldn't be here if it wasn't for what they've done and their prayers for us have been ongoing and their financial support has been amazing, but they don't have control over this church. 

This is an independent church and that's what he believes and that's what he teaches and the seminary teaches. I'll just put that one straight. My job is not to point you to John MacArthur, it's to point you to Christ. What are elders? What are elders? So if we're not priests and we're not vicars, what are we? I'm going to give you six things that elders are. If you want to look again at Titus chapter 1 verse 5, Paul reminds Titus that his job in Crete is to appoint elders. 

And then in verse 6, he launches straight into a lengthy list of essential qualifications for someone who could be appointed as an elder. Now just look at verse 7. In verse 7, he's still going with his list of qualifications, but he uses a different term to describe someone who is an elder. Titus 1 verse 7, for the overseer must be, and then he's back into the need to be above reproach and so on. We're being above reproach, that's for next week. 

We'll get into the list of qualifications just for now. I want you to note this. What we're talking about now is what elders are. And the first thing we can say about elders, I'm going to give you six. The first thing that we can say about elders, what elders are, is elders are overseers. 

That's the word here in verse 7. The Greek word translated overseer is episkopos. And it's worth pointing out that that Greek word, episkopos, is the word that through many changes into Old English and then Middle English and now Modern English, that's the way we get to the word bishop, bishop. According to the Bible, it's interesting because bishop then, episkopos, is just another word for an elder. And that just blew some of your whole church tradition for some of you, didn't it? I mean, it's just like bishop, the bishop, the bishop. 

Actually, according to the Bible, all the elders are bishops. And that would burst some people's bubbles if you applied that in their churches. When Paul wrote to the Philippians, you can look at this for yourself, Philippians 1, 1, he wrote, To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the overseers. There's that word, episkopoi, now in the plural. The overseers and deacons. 

And this is just two offices, deacons and overseers. And let me just state it again, all the bishops are elders. It's all the bishops and all the deacons in one church. And so, bishop or an overseer is not a title in a hierarchy. An episkopos is simply someone who, if you understand the root of that word, an episkopos is someone who scopes, who looks over upon things. 

And the idea is obviously someone who is overseeing what is done, what other people do. And that's helpful. It's helpful to realize what that means in the New Testament church, how it is used in the New Testament. It's used interchangeably with this term elder. Just a quick word about the term elder. 

The word elder, the Greek word translated as elder, is a lovely Greek word, presbuteros. My optician told me the other day, actually last year, that I had presbyopia. Presbyopia. Old eyes. Old eyes. 

It's not a compliment. Obviously, that's the presby bit and that just means old. And in the original use of the term presbuteros, it literally meant the old men in a village or in a tribe. The old men who would naturally be the leaders of that village or that tribe. New Testament times, it's interesting if you're looking for something vaguely analogous to the elders in a church congregation, well, the synagogues had a council of elders who had the job of overseeing things. 

It's not difficult to understand that the elders are then the group of men who are the overseers of the church. And Paul was traveling to Jerusalem at the end of his third missionary journey. He stopped in Miletus. In fact, you can find this in Acts chapter 20 and verse 17. It says he sent a message to Ephesus, to the city of Ephesus, and called to him, and I quote, called to him the elders of the church. 

Now, in verse 28, he says to them that they are to be on guard for themselves and quote, for all the flock, that's the congregation, the flock among which the Holy Spirit has made you, what's the word? Overseers. Okay, it's obvious then, and I'm just trying to prove this so that you can be settled about it, that the elders are the same as overseers. Overseers. Now, there are a few other terms that the Bible uses, and we'll go through these more quickly, but there's a few other terms that the Bible uses for this group of men that oversee a church, that oversee a congregation, and that helps us get a bigger picture of what elders are. So let's go through these. 

Number one, you could say is elders are overseers. Number two, you could say elders are rulers, rulers. Verse 17 in Hebrews, sorry, verse 17 in 1 Timothy chapter 5, 1 Timothy chapter 5 and verse 17, let the elders who, what does it say, rule well, be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching. So he's talking about ordinary elders in a church, he's saying some of them are going to be really devoted to laboring and preaching and teaching, and he's talking about their pay, and he says, let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching. And so there are elders who rule well, probably, and there are elders who don't rule so well, and you're to pay the ones who rule well, well, is the picture in 1 Timothy 5, 17. 

Now, according to the Greek lexicon I used, just moving on the Greek word here, pro-histamia, which is translated as rule, means, I quote, to exercise a position of leadership, rule direct, be at the head. For those of you in the know, that's BDAG, which is reputed to be the best among the Greek lexicons. Now, Paul uses the same word, pro-histamia, that's translated as rule in 1 Thessalonians 5, 12, when he says this. Now, listen, this applies to you. We ask you, brothers, he's talking to the whole church in Thessalonica, the Thessalonians, we ask you, brothers, to respect those who labor among you and are over you in the Lord and admonish you, and verse 13, to esteem them very highly in love because of their work. 

Okay, so let's just get the stick to the point here, and we'll come back to that verse right at the end, perhaps, but it's really hard to distinguish at this point between this word, to rule, which according to the dictionary definition I just gave you, is to exercise a position of leadership, rule direct, be at the head of, and Hebrews 13, verse 17, which gives me my next term for you, elders are to be, first of all, elders are overseers, secondly, elders are rulers, you could say from those two verses I just gave you, thirdly, elders are leaders, but it's actually really hard to distinguish between what's a ruler and what's a leader. Hebrews 13, 17 says, obey your leaders and submit to them, and then he goes on to describe how your leaders keep watch over your soul as those who must give an account and so on. Anyway, the Greek word, we love Greek words today, we don't always dwell so much on Greek words, but I'm trying to show you the differences here, so note it if you like and, you know, just smile if you don't. The Greek word, hegumenois, which is translated as leaders here, according to the same dictionary means to be in a supervisory capacity, lead, guide. Now, just pointing out to you that it's very difficult to differentiate between that and the previous word, and that's like English, there are words that overlap, but it's building a picture, isn't it? So elders are overseers, elders are rulers, elders are now leaders, we say, it's the same word, interestingly, that you find in Stephen's speech in Acts chapter 7, Acts chapter 7 verse 10, when Stephen used it to describe how Pharaoh made Joseph the, and I quote, ruler, it's translated there, ruler of all Egypt, even over his own household. 

So what I'm saying here is that we can't get away from the reality that elders are the people who rule, elders are people who lead, and it's difficult to tell the difference between them, but I'm giving them both. Okay? Obviously, that brings up the question, it's very natural, isn't it, to ask, well, how are elders to rule and how do biblical elders lead and rule? And the most obvious thing that has to be said is that elders are to be leaders and rulers, but they're not to be lords. Can you just get that? If I give it to you as two L's, they're to be leaders but not lords, and you know that that is the case. There's lots of bad examples in perhaps your life, in the church history that confronts us as pastors, there's plenty of bad examples, and time and time again, we're forced to remember the words of Jesus, aren't we? Remember this from Mark chapter 10, when Jesus taught his disciples that those who are considered rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones, the great ones amongst the Gentiles, exercise authority over them. They just dominate. 

But it shall not be so amongst you, said Jesus to his disciples, verse 43. But whoever would be great among you must be your, what's the word, servant, and whoever would be first among you must be slave of all. Put that in your leadership pipe and smoke it. I don't know if you understand that phrase, but you need to meditate on that if you're feeling like, I'm called to lead, all right, you're called to be a slave. It's servant leadership, but it's still leadership, it's still rulership, but it's not lordship leadership. 

And so I'm trying to just make these distinctions as we go by giving you a few biblical examples that help fill out the idea of what an elder is, what elders are. Jesus in the next verse, Mark 10, 45, even said he himself, even the son of man did not come to be served. But to what? Serve and to give his life as a ransom for many. And we are his followers if we follow him, right? Jesus taught us to love each other, this is all of us, as he has loved us. And so leaders are not to be lords, they're to be the least of all, the servant of all, like Paul, a slave of all. 

And I'll just make that point as we go, but I'm still making the point that elders are leaders. So you have to say, well, if they're leaders, how do they do leadership? And there's a lot to be said about that, but they're still leaders, they're still leading, they're still rulers, they're still ruling. And Jesus gave another analogy, didn't he? He called himself, he said, I am the good shepherd. And the good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep. Now, so elders are overseers, elders are rulers, elders are leaders, elders are now fourthly shepherds, shepherds. 

Now, the biblical word that we come out with is pastors, but pastors just means shepherds. Sometimes people ask me what I do and I want to just say I'm a shepherd. And then I remember that I've got a sheep dog and probably people would get very confused at that point. So I might say I shepherd people, shepherd souls. Anyway, Jesus said this to Peter, remember this from John chapter 19, when Jesus restored Peter and he said to Peter, do you love me? And he said it three times, didn't he? When Peter said, yes, Lord, you know that I love you. 

And each time Jesus recommissioned him and he gave him three commissions in that. He said, feed my lambs. Well done. And then he said, tend my sheep. And then he said, feed my sheep. 

Feed my lambs, tend my sheep, feed my sheep. Feed, tend, feed. That's shepherding, isn't it? That's what shepherds do. They feed, they tend, they feed. They tend, they feed, they do it again and again and again and again and again. 

Because sheep just need to eat all the time and they lead them to pasture and they tend them because they get into trouble and then they feed them some more and then they tend them because they get into more trouble and then they feed them some more. And they're just like feeding and tending. It's pastoring. It's shepherding. And that's the basic definition. 

You could say, elders are pastors. Elders are shepherds. Now, interesting to come from Peter when Peter talked about elders. In 1 Peter chapter 5, you'll want to look this up for yourself later, but just maybe look at it on the screen or if you're really quick, follow along with me. 1 Peter chapter 5, when Peter the apostle, the great apostle Peter, when he wrote to the elders, he said this, so I exhort the elders among you as the super apostle, as the apostle of Rome, as the first pope. 

No, he wasn't the first pope. He wasn't the apostle, the apostle in Rome. What did Peter think of himself as? I exhort the elders among you as a fellow. What did he say? Elder. But he's an apostle. 

Yes, but he's also an elder. And he exhorted the other elders as a fellow elder and an eyewitness of the sufferings of Christ, as well as the partaker in the glory of the things that's going to be, the glory that is going to be revealed. Verse 2, here's his exhortation now. Listen, shepherd the flock of God that is among you. Here's Peter's exhortation to the elders is to be shepherding. 

And then he uses our other word, exercising oversight. That's a verb form of our word overseer, not under compulsion, but willingly as God would have you, not for shameful gain, but eagerly, not domineering over those in your charge, not lording it over them. This is not lordship leadership, but this is servant leadership. This is humble shepherd leadership. Now, what do you think Peter's got in his mind when he says, shepherd the flock of God? Shepherd the flock of God. 

This is really interesting, isn't it? Because Jesus told Peter, Peter, what did he say? Feed my lambs, tend my sheep, feed my sheep. Shepherds lead by feeding, don't they? They also tend. That's another aspect to it. But they lead by feeding. What do they feed the sheep with? You don't come here for grass, do you? You come here for the word of God. 

This is food, isn't it? I'm giving you all a talk about biblical elders, and you're still listening. Why? Because this is the word of God, and it's not just interesting, is it? It's food. We need this. We need the whole Bible. It's food. 

And we say, man cannot live on bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. All scripture is breathed out by God and is profitable for teaching. Okay, and the rest of it. But let's just get that teaching. So what am I doing at the moment? I'm teaching you, but I'm feeding you by teaching you. 

And that's what Peter was told to do. Feed my sheep, feed my lambs. Elders are supposed to be teaching, right? That's what elders do. Elders are teachers. Ephesians 4. 

11, Paul refers to an individual, or individuals who are pastors and teachers. You say, well, how do you separate between those two? I guess it would be someone whose ministry is more devoted to teaching, and others who are more, others may be elders who are more devoted to ruling, but all elders have to be able to teach. But one of the requirements of an elder in 1 Timothy 3 is that he is apt to teach. Now, obviously, if we're going to be following the example of Paul as he followed Christ, and if we're going to be listening to what Jesus told Peter about feeding his lambs and his sheep, elders are going to be what teachers, right? That's another thing that elders are going to be. Now, let me just take you back to what Peter said in 1 Peter chapter 5. 

He exhorted the elders as his fellow elders, and he told them, shepherd the flock of God that is among you. And I've said that this is going to include teaching, right? So elders are to be overseers, elders are to be rulers, elders are to be leaders, elders are to be pastor shepherds, elders are to be teachers. That's five. I'm going to give you a sixth and final thing that elders are to be, that elders are, that help us understand what elders are. And it comes out of this verse in 1 Peter 5, as Peter goes on, he says, shepherd the flock of God that is among you, exercising oversight, not under compulsion, but willingly as God would have you, not for shameful gain, but eagerly, not domineering those in your charge, but, now, here's the term, being examples to the flock, being examples to the flock. 

I'm just going to add this as number six because I think this is really helpful. Elders are examples. You can't actually get away from it. You're an example whether you want to be or not as an elder. You're either a good example or a bad example, but you are an example. 

Remember Paul said this to, well, actually, let me go to the writer of Hebrews first. Hebrews, the writer of the letter to the Hebrews in verse 7 of chapter 13 said, remember your leaders, those who spoke the word of God, spoke to you the word of God, he's obviously talking about the elder preachers type people, consider the outcome of their way of life and imitate their faith. You're supposed to be imitating the faith of your leaders. And so leaders are supposed to be setting an example in the area of faith, you would say, and way of life. Actually, it wasn't just the leaders' faith that people were supposed to imitate. 

Paul wrote to the Philippians and said, this Philippians 3. 17, brothers, join in imitating me. And now listen, this is pretty awesome for those of you who are trying to follow us as we follow Christ. And keep your eyes on those who walk according to the example that you have in us. Now, leaders are supposed to be giving an example. 

And then there are supposed to be in any church people who are walking according to the example. And then the writer Paul, as he wrote to the Philippians, said to the Philippians, keep your eyes upon the people who are walking according to the example that you had in us. Isn't that great? You're supposed to have examples. And examples are supposed to have people who are following their example. And everyone's supposed to keep their eyes on the whole shebang, but following the examples. 

When he wrote to the Thessalonians, he said, and you became, this is the model church, the church in Thessalonica, Thessaloniki, whatever, you became imitators of us. And he says of the Lord, that's one Thessalonians 1. 6. When he wrote to the Corinthians, he just said simply, I urge you then be imitators of me. 1 Corinthians 4. 

16, and later in the same letter, be imitators of me as I am of Christ. Now, I'm just putting it to you plainly, one way or another, leaders are an example. Elders are to be examples. And you could say elders are examples. And that obviously raises a big question, doesn't it? There are six things I've given you that elders, to help you to understand what elders are. 

Elders are overseers. They're also a group of rulers in a local congregation, which is the same basic thing as a group of leaders. Now, remember that the elders are told to shepherd, that's not just, that is to pastor. And so I say that the elders are pastors, number four. And Peter says that, reminds us that the pastors are teachers and also that they're to be examples, number six. 

So they oversee, they rule, they lead, they shepherd, they teach, they give an example. And if you've got all of that, you already kind of know the answer to the second question. You remember my second question? Remember the second? It's in the title, Elders and Why You Need Them. We've thought about what elders are. And can I just answer the second question very briefly, which is, why do you need elders? And I want to just give you three quick reasons why you need elders. 

And it's really obvious if you think about that last point, especially elders are examples. We'll come on to the character of the leaders in the weeks ahead. And we're going to spend weeks on the character of leaders because that's going to be an example to us all of what we're to aspire to, right? So we'll come on to that. But I want to make the point, first of all, I'm going to give you three reasons very briefly why you need elders, you personally, and you all collectively need elders. And the first reason is this, Christians haven't evolved. 

I don't believe in evolution as the world teaches evolution. And I don't believe that you've evolved. I don't believe that we've evolved. I don't believe that we've improved. In 2000 years, I don't believe that Christians have improved, do you? My point here is that God designed churches to be led by elders, right? I mean, that's pretty clear from the Bible. 

And he did that for a reason. That's pretty clear from the nature of God. And it's actually pretty clear from the Bible that God designed it that way and specified it that way for a reason. And the reason hasn't gone away. God gave churches elders to meet a need. 

And the need hasn't changed because we've not evolved. We've not changed. Every modern congregation needs a group of men to oversee, rule, lead, shepherd, teach, provide examples, right? I mean, this is basic Bible study now that we're doing. And I know it's been a bit like a Bible study and a bit less like a sermon. But this is basic. 

But it's actually, if you're with me and you know something of the mess in the 21st century church, you're like, why don't churches have biblical eldership? This is really basic. I mean, it's obvious, right? Yeah, it's obvious when you actually study the Bible and think about it. Are you really going to say that the 21st century church has moved on beyond this? Christians now, so improved, they're so well behaved, they're so well self-organized. This is the age of kind of Google leadership, where you go into the office and collectively decide what you want to do together as a team. Having, by the way, having been through an incredible selection process that weeds out all the people who are not actually leaders, and then you get a bunch of leaders in the room and allow them to be creative and collectively decide what's best, right? I mean, so this is the new model of leadership for the world, is it? No, you've just got together a bunch of leaders. 

So forget that model of leadership and say, what do ordinary people need in leadership? Well, ordinary people do need overseers. And not everyone's a leader. And this old fashioned idea now about exercising rule, somebody actually being a ruler, that's not necessary anymore because we've improved, right? Today's sheep have evolved, so they don't need shepherds anymore. That's laughable, isn't it? We don't need to follow their examples because we've all got to the place where we're just directly following Christ. We don't need examples to follow in our lives. 

We've got plenty of teaching on the Internet. You know what? We've got these special ears that tell us what we need to hear. They kind of itch and then we know what ministry we need. Now, I hope you know that I'm being sarcastic because itching ears in the Bible is not a good thing, is it? Itching ears in the Bible is a bad thing. And how do you know then what the best situation for you is? Actually, many of you have come out of places where the leaders in your churches have been so badly unbiblical, you've had to go look on the Internet and find teaching that's biblical. 

And am I telling you you were wrong to do that? How do you go and search for right teaching and know when you found it? Well, thankfully, you had something that you could compare even what you heard on the Internet to, right? What is it? The Bible. You've got a standard. You can be a Berean and you can search the Scriptures. It doesn't say search the Internet. It doesn't say search Google to see whether it's true or not. 

It says search the Scriptures. So you compare what you hear on the Internet to the Bible and you say, I'm going to search the Scriptures to see if these things are so or not. And that's great, isn't it? And you've been able to benefit from finding biblically sound teaching. And then you've come in search of it. Many of you, that's why we exist, because you've come in search of more of it. 

And you've ended up here and we praise God for that. But you do realize, don't you, that God's design for a local church like this one is to have a group of elders who kind of know the congregation and they know the setting that we're in, that you're in, and they know the time and the situation that you face, and they're gifted and called and actually set apart by God with the task of feeding, of teaching, of tending that particular congregation in that particular place at that particular time. And God's plan for that, a local group of men who identify with one congregation, they are the elders of that congregation, that plan of God for you to have your elders, who are the rulers, the leaders, the teachers, the pastors, etc. , the examples, in your congregation, that plan of God for the church hasn't changed with the arrival of the Internet. You say, I can go and get good teaching on the Internet. 

That's true. Praise God for it. But you can't get what you can get from your local group of elders. Maybe you can get teaching at a much higher level from people who are much more gifted than your local elders, but you still can't get what you can get from your local elders who are gifted and set apart and appointed by God to be the elders of your particular congregation. So I'm just saying that in passing. 

God's plan hasn't changed with the arrival of the Internet. Now you'll see when we get into them that the basic, one of the basic biblical qualifications for an elder is to be able to teach sound doctrine. Sound doctrine. And you do know, don't you, that this puts a huge responsibility on the elders of the church because, well, how do you know if your elders are teaching sound doctrine, right? And thankfully, again, you do have the Bible. You can be Bereans. 

You remember the Berean search the Scriptures, not the Internet. But obviously, you do have to avoid, you do have the responsibility as a member of a congregation to avoid being under elders who are leading you astray into unsound doctrine that is not biblical. And that brings me to my second reason why you need elders. You need elders, well, because Christians haven't evolved. The whole scenario hasn't changed. 

We still need elders to do all those things. But secondly, you need elders because there are all, and there always will be, plenty of false teachers. Plenty of false teachers. Just look ahead at verses 10 and 11 very briefly. For there are many rebellious men, empty talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision who must be silenced because they are upsetting whole families and teaching things they should not teach for the sake of dishonest gain. 

Rebellious men. Another way of translating that, insubordinate people. People who reject authority. And they're called empty talkers. They're not afraid to be teachers. 

They should have listened to James, Chapter 3. Not many of you should be teachers, my brothers. You know that we who teach and preach will be judged more strictly. These people are not afraid of that. They're not worried about that. 

They can talk, but they're empty talkers. The windbags. They say things that they should not. Teaching what they should not. And even if they were to say what they should say, some people preach Christ out of envy, but there's no life to match what they say. 

And more than that, these are people who are called deceivers. And they need to be silenced. Now, are you up to that? How do you feel about your qualifications to be the person who has the job of silencing false teachers? Every elder in the room went gulp. And everyone who doesn't have a clue went, yeah! And some of the rest of you just thought, oh no, not me. Okay, you're more realistic. 

And those of you who said, yeah, haven't got a clue. And those of us who know what the task is like all went, oh. Because silencing people like this is a big job. It's a really big job. Paul says they must be silenced. 

Look at verse 10 again. It begins with the word for. For there are many rebellious men, empty talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision, who must be silenced. So look, if you're following, there's a connection between the qualifications of an elder in verse, especially those finishing off in verse 9 and the fact that there are many rebellious men in the church who need to be, in the church setting, who need to be silenced. So if you're still following me, in verse 10, Paul is giving a reason why elders need to be qualified, particularly in verse 9, why they need to be holding fast the faithful word which is in accordance with the teaching so that they will be able both to exhort in sound doctrine and to reprove those who contradict. 

They need to be faithful to biblical doctrine and they need to be able to teach others, but they also need to be able to reprove, means kind of show people where they're wrong and put them right and to make them shut up. People who contradict sound teaching. Four, there are many rebellious men, empty talkers and so on, who need to be silenced. Look, I'm saying you need elders. You need elders first of all because Christians haven't changed. 

You need elders because there are, secondly, there are plenty of empty talkers and deceivers. And lastly, just in two minutes, you need elders because you need to know who your leaders are. Okay, Hebrews 13 and 17, obey, what does it say? Your leaders, your leaders and submit to them as those who must give an account. Sometimes I just ask people when I realize they're floating into this church and floating about and some people are very talkative and they like to share their opinions and they like to go and see if they can get a bit of an audience in the church and I realize they're not joining the church. They kind of avoid us sometimes as leaders. 

I would say avoid those people if you notice this going on. But sometimes I'll ask them, who are your leaders? Who are your leaders? Who are your elders? Why don't you go home and submit to them? Go back to your church and submit to your elders. Don't come to our church and start trying to teach people. You want to teach people in this church. Don't come through us as elders. 

It's our job to guard the church. We have to silence people like you who are talking nonsense, empty windbags. It's my job to shut you up. So I'd rather you just went home and submitted to your own leaders. Who are your leaders by the way? I don't have any. 

I'm just a member of the church of the church, the global church, the universal church. Oh really? Well it says here, obey your leaders and submit to them. You have a duty. You have a duty. You have a duty. 

You're here today. Let me ask this question of you, not in an aggressive way, because all of us are on a journey in our understanding, right? And some of you have come here and you're like, I didn't know I was supposed to have elders. Yeah, you're supposed to have elders. You need elders. The Bible says you're supposed to be obeying them. 

Well you need to know that they're being biblical if you're going to obey them, right? You need to be pretty sure that they're. . . You need to be in the process of. . 

. You need to be. . . Right now you need to be in the process of finding and joining the most biblical church you know. 

You need to be part of that church because you need to be in submission to the elders of that church, according to God. Not me, according to God. And more than that, I mean, I read this to you earlier, but 1 Thessalonians chapter 5 verse 12, we ask of you brothers that you know those who labour among you and lead you in the Lord. I gave it to you from the ESV earlier, and who are over you in the Lord. It's that word for leadership. 

And admonish you. So you're supposed to know us. You're supposed to know your elders. I urge you that you know them. And that sense of. 

. . That word know comes with a sense of recognising them, acknowledging them, also knowing who they are, and as much as you're able, get to know them. Obviously, Jesus couldn't have intimate friendship with everybody. He had more intimate close relationship with the smaller and smaller group of people, didn't he? And it's the same with the apostles, and the same with the church in Jerusalem. 

Thousands of people being added. They couldn't all be best buddies with Peter and Paul and James and so on. So knowing your leaders, don't leave because you don't know what our favourite colour is or something like that. I mean, it's just ridiculous. But you should know who your leaders are, right? You should know them. 

You should be able to recognise them, acknowledge them, and esteem them very highly in love because of their work. You should be able to say, well, these are my leaders, and I respect them, and I esteem them highly in love, and I submit to them, and I will obey them. You're like, I'm giving over my life to a group of just mere men. Well, you better make sure that you're giving over your life to a group of mere men who are not going to lord it over you, right? Who are going to be following Jesus, who are going to be making themselves the slaves of all, who really see that their place is not to be first but to make themselves last, to make themselves the slave of all. You better know that about your leaders, otherwise you better go somewhere else. 

Also, you better know that these men are the real deal. I guess that's my introduction for next week. We're going to go from this, and we're going to spend a lot of time saying, what is it that elders have to be to be qualified to be an elder? Who should be an elder and who should not be an elder? Well, Paul's going to tell Titus about that. Titus, the letter of Titus is going to tell us about that, and we're all, every single one of us, going to be sifted by it, because remember the elders are the examples. So as we go through these qualifications, you're going to see where you're supposed to be too. 

But you'll also have a standard to which you can hold us as elders to account, because if we don't meet it, we don't qualify. And if we're going to appoint people as a church, if we don't meet the standard, if they don't meet the standard, they don't qualify. And we have to be willing to say yes, and we have to be willing to say no. And that's a standard to which we're committed, because it's in this book. Father in heaven, we pray for your blessing. 

Upon this, your word, we pray that now as we turn our attention to your table, you would please minister to our souls, Lord, heal the broken hearted and restore those who are downcast and help us all to fix our eyes on Jesus, to have the hope that we have through his death and resurrection and the forgiveness that's available through his name. We pray for your blessing upon this, your word, that it would accomplish the purpose for which you gave it. In Jesus' name, Amen. . 