---
title: "Transformed Priorities for Young Women Titus - By Mike"
date: 2022-10-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
Throughout history and revealed to us today. You do not expect us to obey you without telling us what we are to obey. You are gracious to reveal your expectations to us. And Lord, we thank you for that because we are desperate to obey. We are thankful for the grace you have given us, and we long to submit our lives to your will, to your expectations, to your plans so that we can glorify you. And here today we see a text that goes against the expectations of our world and our society, a truth, a command that the people in this world that surround us would tell us to ignore or to write off. But Lord, we must obey. Help us to obey. Help us to treasure the act of faithful obedience, to offer ourselves and our lives to you as a sacrifice, to be conformed in the renewing of our mind by the transforming power of your grace so that we can be faithful to glorify you. Help me as I speak to speak with clarity and humility. Help us all as we sit here and hear your word to consider how it might change our lives today. Help us to submit. Help us to depend on you and trust in your promises. We pray in your name and for the name of your Son's glory. Amen. 

One of my favorite things about England is how much this country loves its own history. You see, you might be able to tell if you don't know me, but I'm American. And in America, when something gets outdated, we throw it away. We remove it. We destroy it. If you look at our history, it goes back about 12 hours. We tear it down and we build something new. We forget it, right? But in England, you try your best to preserve it and even to reuse it, even when that becomes impractical. I love that. There's no better example of this in London than the iconic red phone booths all over this city. When was the last time you stepped into one of those phone booths and made a call? For most of us, never, right? They're relics of a bygone age. We live in an age where everything we need is in our pocket with us at all times. There's no point in having these phone booths, but we keep them around. And some, in some areas, we even keep them looking nice, right? They are a memory preserved. And I think that's a wonderful goal, to preserve the things of the past so you can see how your society, how your culture has grown and changed. 
It's one of the things that people love so much about this city and this country. But you know, here's an interesting thing. In our day and age, in the day and age that you and I live in now, many people accuse the church of doing the same thing. From the world's perspective, you and I are trying desperately to preserve outdated, outmoded, unfashionable traditions because we simply can't imagine life working any differently. Now, that's certainly the case in some churches. Some churches are preserving traditions rather than truth. And that's not what we should do. But here's my question. When we read Titus 2 and we see the Bible say that women should prioritize being a worker at home and submitting to their husband's leadership, are you and I just trying to preserve old traditions? Are we just trying to keep something working the way it used to work because we're uncomfortable with the way the world is changing? Because there was a time when the world's priorities for young women closely matched God's priorities, depending on your society and your culture. But if we're talking about this one, you could go back a couple decades and it wouldn't be unreasonable for women to want and to desire to work in the home and to submit to their husbands. 

You didn't need to apologize it because that was what was expected, right? That was the old days. That's history. Our history is history. Our world is desperately trying to get rid of these old practices and standards to make new ones that ignore God's expectations. That reality has made it difficult for you and I to support God's expectations for women in particular. 

See, some of us in this room are totally on board with this. The Bible says women are to be workers at home and we say amen. The Bible says that women are to submit to their husbands and we say amen. But then, when we go out into the world, we're not quite as convicted about those things, are we? Do you know or are you a housewife or a stay-at-home mom who says to someone, oh, I'm just a stay-at-home mom? Are you a husband who feels the need to justify the fact that you've worked diligently to make sure your wife can be at home with the children? Do you feel the need to explain how she doesn't have a full-time job but she works at home as if working at the home isn't like two or three full-time jobs put together, right? We know it's good and right and we believe it, but in our society we feel the need to justify it, don't we? We feel the need to explain why we're actually not that old school because it's still good for this or that or the other reason. Now, that's some of us. Others of us in the room know that this is the truth. We see it in Scripture. We see that it's God's expectation and we do want to obey. We want to submit, but it goes against everything that we've learned and understood in our lives. 

Many of us were raised in families where both parents worked. Many of you women were sent to university by your parents and told to get ahead, get successful, become independent and provide for yourself. The world wants you to pursue success and independence and for many of you, you're really good at it. You're successful, you're independent, you have a good job, you have a bright future and then someone comes or talks about these kinds of passages in Scripture and it gets uncomfortable. It seems like a downgrade, like a step down, a step back from the purpose of life, from what you love most. See, here's the truth. In our society, biblical women's roles are uncomfortable if you like them and they're uncomfortable if you don't like them. It's not easy to accept because Satan has focused his attack in our culture on the home. He has convinced the world largely successfully that rejecting God's expectations is the right move and you and I have been raised in this culture. 
We have breathed this air long enough that it is hard to accept that God's way might be the better way. But remember a few weeks ago, we started looking at Titus 2 and we started in verses 11 through 14 and we saw that God by his transforming grace can help us to joyfully accept our new identity in Christ, our new perspective and our new purpose. 

See, friends, God's priorities for young women are not an old rotten phone booth that should have been thrown away. In fact, Paul argues in our text today that they are one of the foundations of our faithful witness in the world. The big idea for this sermon is this. By God's grace, the church must know and follow God's priorities for young women. The church must know and follow God's priorities for young women. We must know them. We must search the scriptures and understand them and then we must submit ourselves to them. We need to follow. We need to obey. We need to submit. Now you'll notice that I said the church. The church must know and accept God's priorities. Why the church? When Paul is saying young women in this passage, he's not speaking to the church. He's speaking about women who are married who have children in the home. It's a very specific group of people he's speaking to. 

But when we look at this text as a church, we need to see that God's expectations require a church-wide effort. If we want our young women to be faithful to what God has called them to be, it will take all of us committing. The pastors, this text tells us, need to teach. We need to instruct in what God expects. 

And the older women come along and disciple the younger women and teach them how to do these things. We talked about that a couple weeks ago. And the men in the church must aspire to lead homes where their wives can thrive in obedience to God's expectations. So whether you're a mom or you're single or you're a man or you're a woman, all of us in the church need to take these words seriously. And why? Because the stakes couldn't be higher. What does Paul say at the end of verse 5? The reason that the church is committed to the faithfulness of young women is this, that the Word of God might not be reviled. See, in Paul's eyes, the reputation of the Word of God is at stake. 
 
Why would he say that? Because friends, if the truth of the gospel that we proclaim here does not affect and transform and permeate our homes, then can it mean anything? If the home does not match the teaching of the church, then we prove to the world that we're hypocrites, that we're inconsistent, that we don't really take our teaching seriously. It's one thing for you to go out and to preach the gospel, to evangelize to people. But if our homes, if the places where we actually do have control and responsibility over how they function, are not centers of gospel-saturated discipleship, then what are we doing? That's why our study today is of crucial importance for our witness as a church. If the reputation of God's Word is at stake, then we need to take God's expectations for young women seriously, don't we? Now, many of us in this room aren't in that stage yet, but if you hope to be, if you are just starting on that journey, this is a time to pay attention, to be faithful. We need to understand that by God's grace, the church must know and follow God's priorities for young women. So let's start by knowing those priorities. Let's start by understanding what God wants young women to prioritize. Let's look at this text. First, in verse 4, Paul tells us that young women must prioritize family, not self. Prioritize family, not self. 
The older women are to train the younger women, it says, to love their husbands and children. Now, this term love their husbands and children, Paul is actually using two nouns here. He says they must be a husband-lover and a child-lover. This is their identity. 
 
This is something that is, that makes them up. It's not a verb. It's a description of who they are. So the training program for young women starts with loving the people who are closest to them. Love, the operating principle for every Christian. If there's no love, there's no faithfulness to other expectations for a young woman. We're going to see all these different ways the young women need to be faithful, but we start with love. Love is the foundation. It's the key ingredient. It's the melody of the Christian life, and this is just as true in the home as it is outside the home. But notice something interesting. Notice that in verse 4, it says that they are to train the younger women to love their husbands and children, to train them. Now, let me ask you a question. Be honest. Did you, did you need to go to training to get really good at sitting on the couch and watching your favorite TV show? Do you need training? Do you need a personal trainer to enjoy your favorite desserts? No, right? Things that come naturally to us aren't things we need training for. 

So the love that Paul is speaking about is not a love that comes naturally to us. Otherwise, you wouldn't need training. You wouldn't need older women to come along and tell you how to be romantic, right? Simple romantic attraction or instinctual nurturing love that a mother has for their child. That's not what Paul is talking about here. 

Those things happen naturally. We were made to function that way, but this is a love that's difficult to maintain. This is a love that hurts. This is sacrificial love. See, Paul is telling young women that God expects you to love your husband sacrificially. This is a love that is willing, determined. It's not based on the husband's worthiness. It's based on God's command. Did you hear me? Not based on the husband's worthiness. As wonderful as your husband definitely is. There are days where he doesn't deserve your love. There are days where he doesn't deserve your devotion, your affection, your service. And if you're not married now, trust me, it's true. You'll find out. But your love must persist. Your love must continue. Now, why do you love your husband this way? Because Christ loves you this way. 
 
Before you were saved, he loved you so much that he came and died for you. What did we just read in Romans 5? While you were still in sin. And now as a Christian, you still sinned. But does Christ abandon you? No, he advocates for you. The Christian wife follows the example of her Savior by loving her husband at his best and his worst. Christian young women are to be lovers of their husbands and they're called to love their children. Now, love for children is different than love for the husband, right? Because a husband, in theory, should know how to love you back. Even if he's an unbeliever, there should be a mutual sharing of love going back and forth. There's an expectation there. But children need to be taught love, don't they? They need to be taught what it learns, what it looks like to be faithful. And while they're learning, mothers get to bear the brunt of their sin. So motherly love, sacrificial motherly love, is unlimited faithfulness to children in spite of their failure to love and return. 

Now, again, why do you love your children this way? Because your heavenly Father loved you this way. While you were sinning, he's the one who sent his son to die for you. He's the one who took what he loved most and gave it up so that you could be saved. That's the kind of love that mothers are to show to their children. Now, this is a completely different priority than what the world encourages of young women today, is it not? In the world, the kind of love you should chase after is self-love. You chase your dreams, your comfort, your success, your happiness. And if your husband or children get in the way, it's not worth maintaining, is it? In fact, the world says you only pursue marriage or children if they make you happy, right? 
 
But God's standard requires a new priority, a transformed priority. God's standard requires you to put the people closest to you before you and love them sacrificially, no matter what it costs you. Now, that love is the foundation of everything else that Paul is going to expect young women to do. We start with love because God started with love. That's the gospel. The gospel hinges on the love of God. We love because he loved us. Young women love your husbands and children sacrificially because God loves you sacrificially. Prioritize sacrificial love over self-love. That's the first priority God gives young women, but that's not all. Second, he says prioritize the home, not the workplace. 

In verse 5, Paul says that young women are to be self-controlled, pure, working at home, and kind. Paul describes transformed young women using three character traits and one area of responsibility. We're going to address the area of responsibility first. That's the worker working in the home. This is the controversial one, but this sets up the bounds of where the mother and the wife is to practice those character traits. So we could say that young women are to be workers in the home, and their work is to be characterized by self-control, purity, and kindness. So let's start with working at home. We could also translate it busy at home or keepers at home or managers of the household. Now think about this. 
 
In Titus 2, as we've been studying through these verses, Paul doesn't give older men or younger men any area of responsibility. He tells them what he expects of them, how they're to act, but he doesn't say where. He doesn't say to whom. It's general. But he tells older women to take their character traits and their qualifications and focus specifically on training younger women. And then he tells younger women to take those biblical character traits and focus them specifically in the home. Why does Paul do that? Well, remember that we've talked about how Crete was a cultural disaster. It was a world gone mad. The church in Crete was having to hold up the faithfulness of God in a dark and evil context. Paul wanted women in Crete to understand where God wanted them to focus their efforts. He actually expects the Cretan women to work in the home as a sign of their Christian faithfulness. So what he's not doing is trying to hold up a cultural standard that we could say is outdated today. He's holding up God's standard in a culture characterized by rampant sin. Do we live in a culture characterized by rampant sin? Do we need to remember what God's standard is? See, if Christians prioritize God's perspective on a young woman's area of responsibility, then they get to demonstrate God's transforming grace. And that's what we are made to do. So Paul explicitly tells young women that their responsibility is to work in the home. It's as simple as that. 
 
He doesn't say, but if yet except and also he just says workers at home. That phrase is to define young women who have who are married with children. As tempting as it is for me and for us to try to soften the blow of this expectation, we have to follow Paul's example. Paul is relating to us God's standards, God's expectations. It's easy for us to accept God's standards when they're about me being forgiven for my sin and going to heaven, right? We have to make sure that we are consistent in accepting and appreciating what God demands. Now perhaps in your mind, there are a million different objections at play and that's understandable. Because like we said, we're living in a culture that hates these things. The world says that this standard hurts women, devalues women, places men in a position of authority and leads to abuse. But friends, God thinks differently. This is God's standard. So rather than think about it the way the world thinks about it, here's how we need to think. We need to ask this question. 

How does my life show that God's priorities are my priorities? When people look at me and they see the way I live, how can they tell that I care more about what God cares about than what the world cares about? Or specifically for today's text, how does my life, whether I'm a young woman or I'm married to one or I go to church with them, demonstrate my commitment to obey and to love God's expectations? How are you showing that, friends? Because this kind of expectation isn't theoretical. It's real. Many of us, men and women alike, are tempted to play the world's tune when it comes to the expectation that young women are to be workers at home. The world, as we said, tells young women to prioritize success even at the cost of the home. And husbands, we know that if our wives work, we reap material and social benefit. We're so concerned with our own personal growth and success and happiness that if the home needs to suffer, that is worth it for us to feel fulfilled. But biblical thinking says, I will only be fulfilled if I am obedient. Biblical thinking says, prove to me that I should prioritize anything higher than what God expects of me. So it really is as simple as this. God expects the wife and mother to be a worker in the home. That's it. 
 
Now for one clarification, one comment. Pastor John MacArthur says this about the phrase workers at home. Listen closely to what he says. This does not strictly forbid women from working outside the home. But it does say that there will be plenty of work awaiting her when she arrives home and that she must carefully balance any outside labor or activities to see that her home and family are prioritized appropriately. In other words, being a worker at home is not the limit of what you are able to do or allowed to do. It is the foundation. It is the baseline expectation of God for a wife and mother. The Christian woman prioritizes the home over the workplace. This doesn't mean the workplace is off limits, but it comes second to the home. The Bible doesn't condemn women working outside the home. If you read the Gospels and Acts, you see stories of women who are faithful in the church, who hold down jobs. Proverbs 31 tells us, paints us this picture of a woman who is a faithful mother and wife and also successful in business. If you and your husband determine that you are one of the few who can be faithful in the home and out in the workplace, then there is freedom to do so. And here's the thing. Your husband answers for that decision. He is responsible before God for making the decision to do that. But remember this, working at home is a lot of work. 
Faithfulness at the home when you have young children is a huge responsibility. Paul doesn't want us to take this work lightly. He expects young women to do it faithfully. You cannot work outside the home to the detriment of your faithfulness to the home. If faithfulness will cost you, as it always does, God wants you to act obediently and trust him. So young women and their husbands and their churches should make sure that they prioritize the home as a woman's sphere of responsibility. It's that simple. Some of us need to grapple with this expectation. Some of us need to change our thinking, to submit to Scripture. And I know that that's not easy, but if it's what God wants for us, then can we trust him that it's good? So women need to be workers in the home, with that groundwork laid. 
 
Paul gives us three characteristic character traits that should describe that work, describe the Christian young woman. 
 
First, be self-controlled. Now self-controlled is our keyword for Titus 2. Everyone who claims Christ must be self-controlled because the Christian life is one where we have put off the evil passions of the flesh and we are working by the spirit to master our desires and submit them to God's will. All of us are doing that. But how does that play out in the home? If a wife and mother is in the home, what does self-control look like for her? Well, obviously, a lack of self-control is poison to your walk with Christ. You cannot be faithful to Christ if you are not self-controlled. But in addition to that, a lack of self-control will hamstring your effectiveness in the home. I am not a worker in the home, but I am married to a beautiful and excellent worker in the home. And so I get to observe her life and her work. And here's some ways I would describe being a worker at home. It closely resembles being a general manager of a restaurant, being a head teacher for a primary school, operating heavy machinery, being a police officer, and often firefighting. Being a worker at home is difficult and challenging. And it's wearing many hats. And if you were in any of those roles and you lacked self-control, the consequences would be devastating. So why would it be anything less in the home? Young women, mothers and wives, where do you lack self-control? Where do you indulge or fail to stay disciplined? What habits are derailing your faithfulness to your calling? You are expected. 

You must work towards gaining control over these things with the grace and help of God. Self-control is necessary if you want to be faithful. Young women must be self-controlled. And second, Paul says they must be pure. Now, purity is a protective term. It's about keeping one's heart and mind from danger, about fixing one's heart and mind on what is best. Now, obviously, if a young woman is to protect the home, she must protect her marriage. So marital faithfulness is a part of this purity. But it's also just true of general moral purity as well. Our homes, as we said, are a demonstration to the world of our faithfulness to God's Word. Young women, are your affections being kindled for Christ or for this world? Think about your leisure time. 

Is your leisure time described by Philippians 4-8? Do you spend your time thinking on whatever is true and honorable and just, whatever is pure and lovely and commendable, the things that are excellent and worthy of praise? Or in your downtime, in your spare time, when you have a moment, do you spend your time with the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and the pride of life? Things that are not from the Father, but are from the world. See, our home needs to be a faithful beacon of the Word of God, a bright and shining light. And when we are impure, that light is tinted. We must be pure. You must protect your hearts, sisters. You must protect your mind. You must cultivate purity in your marriage and in your home. Self-control, purity. And then the last one, kindness. This is an interesting inclusion on Paul's part. Why kind? This is just being nice. Why are young women to be kind? Well, think about it this way. To run a home, as we said, is a very challenging job. To run a home effectively requires diligence and focus and effective time management. And when things become challenging, our natural human response in those moments is to become frustrated, to become overwhelmed, to become angry. I remember seeing a sign in a home once that said, when mama ain't happy, ain't nobody happy. That sounds, it has a nice ring to it, but it actually paints kind of a sad picture of the home, right? Many homes are run effectively. 

Many homes from the outside looking in are clean and organized and everyone's nice and it looks great, but they're run that way because mom is using the threat of her displeasure to keep people in line. It's a kind of tyranny. It keeps things organized, but there's no joy. God does not want you to succeed in your home in a way that does not glorify him. We are never to accomplish his purposes by means that break his word. Does that make sense? Young women are your homes marked by your kindness. Mothers, wives, do your husbands and children tiptoe around you for fear of upsetting the balance or breaking your rules? Is it clear to your family that your concern is more for keeping up appearances than for love? 

How will it, the testimony that matters most in the home is the testimony to our children and they see truly what we really prioritize, don't they? Mothers, if there is no kindness in your management of your home, then you are showing them that God is not kind. You are showing them that the gospel doesn't really matter. What matters is getting things done. That is a testimony that we cannot risk. If you want to run your home with kindness, you need to depend on the kindness of your loving God. When things don't go according to your plan, your kind God ordained it. When your children get sick again, your kind God intended it to be that way. And sisters, when your tasks are piling up and you can't accomplish them all today, your kind God still loves you. Your homes can and must reflect the kindness of God to your children and to the world. Paul tells young women to be self-controlled, pure, working at home and kind. Paul paints a picture of a home that is managed by a woman who is in control of herself, who works diligently and loves with kindness and graciousness. Is there anyone who wouldn't want to live in that sort of home? The home must be a gospel saturated and grace-filled place for your family. If you want to accomplish that, you need to stop prioritizing with the world prioritizes. You need to set your sight on God's vision for the home, and then you will find endless work and joy to accomplish his goals. Now for some of us, the reality is we need to grapple with the fact that our vision of working in the home does not match God's vision. 

Whatever your work might be offering you in terms of glory and praise and achievement and riches is nothing in comparison to the investment in your family and your children. And you have to believe that those one or two or ten little children that you've been given and those couple of decades you have to work with them and to shape them and to love them and to shepherd them is worth whatever the world could offer in exchange. If God has made it this way then it is good sisters. We must prioritize the home, not the workplace. So there's one final priority. We prioritize the family, not ourselves women. 

We prioritize the home, not the workplace. And last but certainly not least in verse 5, prioritize submission, not independence. Again reading verse 5, young women must be self-controlled, pure, working at home, kind, and submissive to their own husbands that the Word of God might not be reviled. Submissive to submit is to place yourself under someone's authority. Biblical submission is voluntary compliance. Paul is writing about a continual commitment to submitting to your husband. This isn't selective. This isn't on occasion. This isn't when all the terms are met and all the situations are just right. This is continual voluntary submission. Now submission isn't only for wives, right? In this text, in the next paragraph, we will see that slaves must be submissive to masters. And in the next chapter, we see that we all must be submissive to the governing authorities. And obviously, we all submit to God and to His Word. But in this verse, Paul is outlining a specific authority for wives, their own husbands. Now Paul doesn't tell women to submit to men in general. He doesn't tell women to submit to husbands in general. He tells the married young woman to submit herself to her own husband. Now why does Paul conclude his lists of attributes for young women with this? Well, notice that the woman's relationship with her husband book ends this list. It starts with loving her husband and it ends with submitting to her husband. 

That's because the young woman's relationship to her husband is the focal point of her work in the home. Why? Because it is the husband's responsibility to set the direction of the home and the marriage. 

The husband answers for the direction he sets the home in for his ability to lead the home. The woman, according to this passage, is not responsible for that direction. She is responsible for her submission, for her voluntary willingness to submit to her husband's leadership. Now why does the home work this way? Well remember that God created Eve for Adam because in the garden Adam did not have the help he needed to accomplish God's mission. Eve was created to come alongside Adam and give him the help he needed and every honest man in this room will confess that he needs help. God designed the marriage relationship as the ideal means for men to get the help they need to be faithful to what God has called them to do. His wife comes alongside him to help him in that work. So young women, why do you need to prioritize submission to your husband? Because God designed your life to work that way. Ephesians 522, Paul says, why submit to your own husbands as to the Lord? We all submit to the Lord and then wives submit to their husbands. It's a command. It's the best way. It's the way God intends this world to work. His expectation of you is continual voluntary submission to your husband. Now this is the opposite of what the world wants for you, isn't it? The world has replaced the virtue of submission to authority with the virtue of independence. And I know it's a little bit awkward for an American to get up here and start lecturing about independence. 

But the reality is that nowadays the concept of submission, of giving up your autonomy and your freedom and your personal will is the only thing less popular than giving up your work to go work in the home. 

The world has redefined submission to make it something that God does not intend for it to be. The world is going to accuse you if you say I want to submit to my husbands. It's going to say that submission means things that it doesn't. So I want to take a few minutes and tell you some things about submission as the Bible intends it. What is biblical submission? Well first, biblical submission is not degrading. The world will tell you that submitting yourself to someone else in any sphere is degrading. What we are talking about is a distinction of roles, not a measurement of worth. Just because you're subordinating yourself to someone does not mean you are any less of a person. How do we know that? Because our King of Kings, our Lord of Lords, Jesus Christ, submitted himself to the Father. And when he did that he did not lose any of his glory or become anything less than who he was. When you submit you are accepting your role in God's plan for marriage. Because marriage is about two people becoming one. It's about a divine mingling of souls and of purposes and of intent. When you get married you're not a lesser person but you become a new person with your husband. God is most glorified in marriage when both husband and wife willingly love each other sacrificially. 

This means giving up preferences and personal goals for the sake of family. It means accepting your roles and fulfilling them with God's confidence in God's perfect plan. And it's absolutely worth it. There's nothing degrading about knowing what God has for you and doing it faithfully. Submission is not degrading. Second, contrary to what the world thinks, submission is not slavery. 

Your husband does not have complete and total control and authority to make you do whatever he wants. As we've talked about he is in a line of authority as well, isn't he? There are areas where he is under the authority of the governing authorities. He is under the authority of the church and he is always under the authority of God and God's word. If he wants to lead you into sin or into rebellion against God then you call him to repentance. If he tries to force you to go against Scripture, he's not submitting to his own authority and he's asking you to participate in sin. If he is abusing you or your children, he is in sin and you should confront him and act in accordance with the law. If he's a Christian then you're his sister in Christ. 

You will need to call him to repentance humbly and graciously. He may not listen. And if he's a Christian then Matthew 18 tells you to approach him as a brother in Christ to restore him to fellowship. But submission is not slavery. It's not mindless obedience. It's faithful, willing submission. Do you see the difference? Third, biblical submission is not optional. 1 Peter 3, 1 through 2 tells us, Likewise, wives be subject to your own husband so that even if some do not obey the word, they may be one without a word by the conduct of their wives. When they see your respectful and pure conduct, you must submit. You must subject yourself to him. Again, if they are sinning, if they are asking you to sin, if they are trying to make you go against your ultimate authority, then you don't do that. But he sets the direction of the home. He will answer for it. You, sisters, will answer for your submission. And here's the thing. That submission may win him over. Because if you are in an unequally yoked marriage and if your husband does not love the Lord and if he is a difficult man, your ultimate dream is not to get out of that marriage. Your ultimate dream is to see him saved, isn't it? And Peter tells us in 1 Peter 3 that maybe God will use your faithfulness to save your husband's life. 
Now, this is the kind of situation that the church is here to help with. We want you to know that if you are in an unequally yoked marriage, if your husband does not love the Lord and you are desperately trying to submit, we are here to help you and to comfort you and encourage you to persist. We want you to be faithful and we want to be there with you and help you be faithful. If you are discouraged, remember that your good loving God willed this for you. He knows what you need and he is faithful. But submission is not optional. But finally, biblical submission is not begrudging. Okay? If you have ever told a child to go do something, go clean your room and they go, and they go, ah, fine. Do you feel really respected and loved and appreciated in that moment? Do you feel like you have control over the situation? No. Sisters, you cannot create a home in which your husband fears leading because of how difficult you make submission. There are some uncomfortable proverbs in our Old Testament. Think of Proverbs 21-9. It is better to live in a corner of the house top than in a house shared with a quarrelsome wife. Now notice that the husband is expected to continue to live in that home. But you don't want that to describe your home. Biblical submission is not begrudging. You can and must submit joyfully, humbly, and willingly. And this means a commitment to something difficult, doesn't it? Because we've already said us husbands are gonna mis-make big mistakes. We do not deserve your submission all the time. 

But if you obey begrudgingly, if it costs your husband for you to do as he asks, you fail to represent the love of Christ. That's not biblical submission. Biblical submission then is not degrading. No matter what the world says, it is not degrading. It is not slavery. But it is not optional. And it is not begrudging. That's a very short summary of what we're talking about when we say submission. So according to Titus 2-4-5, these are God's priorities for young women, for wives, and for mothers. Prioritize others, not yourself. Prioritize the home, not the workplace. And prioritize submission, not independence. Young women, your faithfulness to fulfill these expectations in your life will uphold the integrity of the church's proclamation of the Word. That's a big deal. We cannot take this lightly. So the question is now, okay, we see what they are. Now how? What do we do with this? How do we go about being faithful in a world that rejects God's priorities? How do we thrive in our obedience? How do we as a church work together to help young women, to help families be faithful, to prioritize their homes and marriages in a world that wants us to do the opposite? Well, let's talk about some ways that we can follow God's priorities. Because by God's grace, we need to know and follow God's priorities for young women. Well, remember that a few weeks ago when we studied Titus 2, Paul told us that when God's grace appeared, it saved us, and now it is transforming us. It's transforming us. It's training us. Paul taught us that the Christian has a new identity, a new perspective, and a new purpose in Christ. 

So if we're going to put God's priorities into practice, we're doing so by God's grace. God's grace will train us. The grace of God can help us to do these three things. Three things we can do to submit to God's will, God's priorities for young women. First, you need to cultivate a transformed view of God. Cultivate a transformed view of God. If you want to accept and to celebrate God's priorities, you need to accept and celebrate who God really is. You need to make sure that your picture of God is painted by His Word and not by the fallen world that hates Him. The world today tells us that the God of the Bible is one of two things, a vindictive evil puppet master who wants to see you suffer, or a fluffy, gentle, spineless genie who wants to make you feel good. But the Bible paints us a portrait of God who has used His infinite power to craft a world that maximizes His glory. Romans 8.28 tells us that we know, not we hope, but we know that for those who love God, all things work together for good. And that means that the all-powerful, infinite, mighty God is working out everything that happens to bless those who love Him. Christian, if you love Him, then everything in this world is designed to bless you for it. And if you love Him, you will obey His commands. So if we are faithful to obey the commands of the Almighty God of Scripture, He will bless us. You need to believe that if you're going to prioritize what He prioritizes. 
Now, Israel dealt with the same issue that we do. You ever think about that? Have you read the law and thought about how weird the Israelites would have looked and acted? Can you imagine seeing a person with long tassel? And we see people like that around, right? The way that they looked and acted was meant to be different. They were meant to stand out and make the world uncomfortable. 

And the world constantly pushed back and wanted Israel to change and conform and to disappear into the general culture. And it was Israel's job to stand firm. Psalm 115 is a Psalm that was written by someone who wanted to help Israel stand firm. Listen to what the psalmist writes in Psalm 115-2. He writes, Why should the nation say, Where is their God? Our God is in the heavens. He does all that He pleases. The psalmist notes that Israel's enemies mock them because there's no idols or images to worship. They think that Israel is worshiping some made-up idea, but the Israelites confess, The Israelites confess, No, we worship the true God, and He is in heaven doing as He pleases. Then the psalmist compares that vision of God with the gods of the world. He says, Their idols are silver and gold, the work of human hands. They have mouths, but do not speak. Eyes, but do not see. They have ears, but do not hear. Noses, but do not smell. They have hands, but do not feel. Feet, but do not walk. And they do not make a sound in their throat. Those who make them become like them. So do all who trust in them. See, the psalmist is painting this picture of these powerless, worthless gods created by powerless people who are trying to create an alternate reality that leaves them speechless and useless in God's world. The world is willingly, it's enslaving itself to demonic images of its own making. But Christian, who do we serve? We serve the God of the Bible. Listen to how this psalm finishes. Oh, Israel, trust in the Lord. He is their help in their shield. Oh, how severe and trust in the Lord. He is their help in their shield. You who fear the Lord, trust in the Lord. He is their help in their shield. Christian, your God is your help and your shield. 

In the midst of a world that attacked Israel's obedience, Israel needed to remind themselves of who God was. And by God's grace, you need to do the same thing. You need to cultivate a view of God that's big enough that you fear Him so that you will stand firm when the world pushes back. If you have that perspective, you can submit. And that's the first thing you have to do. You have to cultivate a transformed view of God. But second, you have to cultivate a transformed view of male leadership. If the man of the home is the person who leads the home, then men need to understand and honor God's priorities. If the woman is on board, if she wants to obey but her husband doesn't, then there will be difficulty. There will be conflict. There will be tension. If a man doesn't fear the Lord, then he's not prioritizing what the Lord prioritizes. So, men, here's my counsel. Whether you're married or not yet married, know God's priorities. Love God's priorities and help your wives be faithful. Help her be a worker at home, even if it costs you. Even if it means you need to work a different job or don't get to live where you want to live or don't get to have the lifestyle you always wanted. She needs to submit to your leadership, but don't make that submission any more difficult than it has to be. Do your best to make it a joy to submit to you. I have some warnings for us young men and old men who are married. Here's what God expects of leadership. If your leadership of your wife is more concerned with your own pleasure, your own comfort, your own preferences or security than those of your wife, you are failing as a husband. Ephesians 5.25 tells us what. Husbands love your wives as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her. 

Husbands, are you giving yourself up for your wife? Are you, is the operating principle of your leadership self-sacrifice? If Jesus did it, then you do it. Now, you must help your wife to thrive no matter what it costs you. And that thriving must be defined by God, not the world. And that's what we're talking about today, but you sacrifice. 

You willingly hurt so that she can grow and flourish in your home and in the roles God has given her. You must give yourself up for your wife. Now, second, if your leadership of your wife is ignorant of who she is, if it ignores how God made her, then you are failing as a husband. Think about this. If your boss is the kind of person who comes in on a whim and changes the whole plan or designs the next six-month strategy based on a team that doesn't exist, expects things of you that you know no one on your team can accomplish, do you usually come home from work satisfied and joyful? No, of course not, right? You're miserable and frustrated because good leaders know and understand the people who they lead. Husbands, God expects you to know your wife, to know her fears and her anxieties and her worries, to know her likes and dislikes, to know her strengths and weaknesses. 1 Peter 3.7 says, Husbands, live with your wives according to understanding, showing honor to the woman as the weaker vessel since they are heirs with you of the grace of life so that your prayers may not be hindered. You are to know and to understand and appreciate and accommodate your wife. You set the vision. You are the leader. You are deciding the direction, but if you make that, if you make those decisions in a vacuum as though your wife doesn't exist, you are not leading well. Finally, if your leadership of your wife does not celebrate her strengths and recognize your weaknesses, you are failing as a husband. Proverbs 31, the husband of the Proverbs 31 woman, he calls her blessed. He praises her publicly. He trusts her. When Adam met Eve, he burst out in song. 

How many of you burst out in song when you think about your wife? Don't do it now. When you lead, you should listen to your helper. She knows better than you, more often than you want to admit. She is there to help you. You need her, men. Do you recognize that? This is how it's designed to work. Leadership is not you running ahead in her keeping up. If she's not able to speak up, to challenge, to encourage, to exhort, to help you see different perspectives, then you're not leading with humility and grace. What can you trust her with? What is she better at than you? How has God gifted her? Is she allowed to tell you when you're wrong, when you're in sin? Do you treat her as a sister in Christ? Do you let her help you see what you can't see? Because husbands, the implications of submission are staggering. As we said when we started the series on Tyus, remember we were talking about elders? We were saying this is scary because the elder system makes it possible for the leaders to take advantage. But God made it that way. That's how he designed it. You cannot take advantage. You must steward the submission of your wife tenderly. Now, if the things I just said mean that you're failing, if you've been failing in any of these areas, there is still hope. God and His grace can and will transform your leadership. But it starts with knowing what he expects and then getting in line then. Be a man worth submitting to. You can only do that with God's help. And single ladies, just a note. 

Find a man who prioritizes what God prioritizes and all of this will be easier. It doesn't mean he's not going to sin. He's still going to sin a lot. But you want to find a man and submit to a man who's on the same page as the Lord. Do you see that? So to follow God's priorities for young women, we need to cultivate a biblical fear of God. And we need to cultivate men who honor God's priorities. That's the job of the church. If you want help with that men, join men's ministry. Join a fellowship group. Get committed. Get known. And finally, we need to cultivate a transformed view of church fellowship. The church acts like a greenhouse for God's priorities. The outside world is cold and the weather changes. But in the church, we treasure and we cultivate and we nurture the things that God loves. And we do our best to protect them and to help them thrive and to help us learn how to steward them faithfully. You need to be in a church that does that. And by God's grace, our church is trying to prioritize God's priorities for young women. Praise God. If that's what you want to do, that is what we want to do as well. But it's not enough to just be here. You don't just walk in and walk out on a Sunday morning and become who God wants you to be. Young women, you need to actively cultivate these desires and passions for God's priorities. So how do you do that in the church? Well first, follow God's structure in Titus 2, right? The structure in Titus 2 is there. The pastors instruct the older women, disciple, the younger women are trained. If you want to do this better, find an older woman or woman who can help you grow. That's how God designed it. And again, a great way to do this is to be a part of our women's ministry. 

Our women's ministry is going through Titus 2 this year and learning how to apply these things. So if you want to learn, you can start right now joining other women. Young women who aren't married yet, who maybe don't understand or agree with these things but want to learn. Young women who are married and are desperately trying to honor God even in the difficulties of home life. And older women who want to help instruct. Use the means that God has designed for the church. Get discipled. But don't just cultivate relationships with other women. Cultivate your relationship with Jesus. You cannot be a faithful worker at home and wife if you don't also prioritize your relationship with your Savior. You need to be faithful as a Christian. That means you need to practice the means of grace. It is probably harder for mothers than for anyone else to get time in the Word and in prayer. They come to church in order to worship and they spend most of their time loving their children, right? Fellowship is interrupted. The truth is that sometimes when we have young children, they end up being the priority over our relationship with God. And mothers, you need to understand. You need to believe that your children and your family need you to prioritize your relationship with God most. The better you know God, the stronger your relationship will be with your husband. The easier it will be to submit, faithful in the home. So you and your husband need to think through how to ensure that as much as is reasonable, you are consistent in the means of grace and you are participating in church life. You need to get time in the Word and in fellowship. 

Now listen, you don't need that because without those things you're a bad Christian. Do not let Satan condemn you. If you fail to get time in the Word or in prayer or you miss church, it doesn't mean you're a bad Christian. It means that you are a starving Christian. And the expectations of us are high and if you are not nourished with the bread of life, if you're not drinking deeply of the Word of life, how will you do what you need to do faithfully? God does not condemn you or write you off when you fail, but you are hindered. Don't hinder yourself. When you are a mom, you need your daily bread. You need to sit in the chapel and participate in the worship service. There is a lot to do and you need your Savior's words in your head and your heart. So families need to work diligently to get mom the time and space she needs to be faithful to her walk with Christ. So how do we follow God's priorities? We cultivate a transformed view of God. 

We cultivate men who have a transformed view of male leadership and we cultivate a transformed view of church fellowship. Because by God's grace, the church must know and follow God's priorities for young women. 

It's a must. There is so much at stake, friends. Our homes are the base of our witness. They prove our integrity. They show all of the unbelievers in our lives, our neighbors, our friends, our family, and most importantly, if you have them, our children that we take our faith seriously enough to practice in public and in private. Church, we must believe that God's priorities for young women are not a relic of a bygone age. They are the foundation of the home. They are the way God intended for our families to work. 

And when we trust him, when we follow his priorities, we will thrive and our testimony will be faithful. Because the transformed priorities of Christian young women are a testimony to the grace of God in our mad and fallen world. So church, let's make God's priorities our priorities for his glory. Amen. Let's pray. Lord Jesus, we have a great task before us to be faithful witnesses, to be lights of truth in a dark world. And you have given us your church as a place where we can know you and worship you and serve you and serve one another. 

We thank you for the gift of your church. Please help us. Help us as we work against the direction of the world. As we swim upstream, help us to be faithful and bless our faithfulness. Show us your kindness as we attempt to submit to your will. Help all of us to be committed to helping the wives and mothers in this church to be faithful workers at home. Bless our women's ministry as the older women help the younger women. Bless our men's ministry as we learn to cultivate homes where submission is a joy and where work at home can be done in a God glorifying way. Help us, Lord. We want to be faithful. We want to have integrity. We want to demonstrate to this world that our love for you is worth the cost. Please bless our efforts and be faithful to us. We pray in your name, amen. 

Now, if you want to discuss any of this with me, I'm happy to talk afterwards. I did want to mention that the autumn retreat in a few weeks is about marriage and men's and women's roles. So if these things are raising questions in your mind and you want to spend more time thinking through these things and talking about them, then I would definitely recommend trying to make it to that. I'm praying it would be really helpful. So that's it for today. You are dismissed.