---
title: "The Parable of Divine Joy"
date: 2022-11-06
draft: false 
---
And as many of you well know, this place has come to be a treasured, treasured congregation. Many of you are my friends. I look forward to enjoying fellowship with you after the service today. I couldn't have come on a better Sunday, could I? And I'm so grateful to be here. Well I'm going to pray one more time because I need it. And I'm going to ask you to turn in your Bibles to Luke chapter 15. Luke chapter 15. 

And as you flip there, I'll pray for our time in the Word. Oh Father in heaven, how great you are. Father, we thank you that you have not dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Oh Father, would you do what you love to do? Magnify your Son and esteem above all things your Word and your name that we might know you. Oh Father, speak now that we're expectant and we ask it for Christ's sake. Amen. Amen. 

I want to ask you a question and really today I'm going to preach what really amounts to about two sermons, just an extended introduction and then we're going to exposit the text in Luke 15. And the question I want to ask you as we begin this morning is, what thrills God? What thrills God? Jonathan Edwards, a very young Jonathan Edwards wrote, resolved to examine carefully and constantly what that one thing in me is, which causes me in the least to doubt the love of God and to direct all my forces against it. What if you and I believe Christ really loves us the way he says he loves us? It would change our life. It would change this wonderful church for the better and the better and the better with each passing year. We look at Jesus Christ. We see the sick and the desperate swarm him and instead of snapping his fingers and healing them all in an instant, he took his very precious time and he hugged them to heal them. Can you imagine watching him hugging these sinners to heal them? Can you imagine being one of his disciples at the end of a very long day? You've already made your way back to camp. 

You've already roasted your dinner on the fire. You're laying down. You're getting ready for bed and he drags himself back to camp, basically sleepwalking. He reeks of people's sweat, blood and disease. I mean, it is as if we could smell his compassion if we were there with his disciples. That's what it would have been like to see him. Think about this. 

What is the greatest of all services? The greatest of all services that came into the mind and heart of God to bestow upon the greatest of all servants? Is it not the salvation of sinners like you and I? I want us to venture into the heart of God as he's revealed it in his word. Richard Sibbs says this, let us make use of it. Let us make use of what we find of God's heart in his word. Go out of Christ for nothing. Christ is a king. Go out of him for nothing. Why are we so dejected as if we had not such a rich husband? All our husbands riches, our hours for our good. 

All that is in Christ is for us. I beseech you therefore, let us learn to know Christ better. And this sounds strange to make use of him. Make an argument from God himself to bind him. I know that sounds very strange to us. It ought to sound strange to us. And yet this is how the Lord will speak. 

We must be careful with it, but we must heed these words. God will be bound with his own arguments. Bind him, Sibbs says, with his own mediator. He's put forth Christ and he's told us how to make use of Christ. He's told us why Christ has come. He's told us who Christ is and what Christ has done. And he tells us in 1 John chapter 1, if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 

We need to navigate these things. We need to interrogate our heart with these things. Press our heart up against the corner and say heart that trusts, that distrusts God's love. This is how we aim all our forces at the distrust in our heart towards God's love. We say things like this because of Christ. God has said that he would be unfaithful, that he would be unjust to withhold forgiveness from us if we come confessing, if we come agreeing with him that we are sinful beyond measure. He has rendered himself unjust and unfaithful if he would be reluctant in that moment from bestowing upon us total pardon, total forgiveness, total cleansing. 

And so that's why we come. We come yet again together and we say, oh God, truth telling God, great God, God of love, blot out our sins. Do not deal with us according to our sins because though our sins are so vastly many, the mercy of Christ is more though our sins are more than we can count or remember. They are finite and the grace of Christ is infinite. But what happens if we've relapsed into sin? What hope is there for the one that's relapsed into sin? Maybe you've become acquainted again with an old sin and it grieves you. Perhaps you've come in this morning and you've sung with God's people and you sense the hypocrisy as I often do. What happens? Is there hope for us? I want to reacquaint you with a young man named Peter. 

In the third and final year of Jesus's ministry, at his most mature, Peter sank like a fool into the Sea of Galilee, yelping like an injured dog. He rebuked Jesus shortly thereafter, who then says, get behind me, Satan. And then immediately, within a week, Peter repeats his folly in front of Moses and Elijah and a transfigured Jesus so that God the Father himself speaks from heaven and has to tell Peter, shut it. I don't know that there's been anyone else that's been rebuked by more than one member of the Trinity in a single week. Peter managed. He then commits Jesus to pay that tax without consulting him. He refuses to let Jesus wash his feet. 

He sleeps not once or twice, but three times when a tormented Jesus has begged him to pray. He jumps up to behead a man as Jesus goes to die for him. He curses like a sailor and swears in false witness under oath within earshot of Jesus that he does not know him, not once, not twice, but three times, even to young girls. And then he runs away, crying like a little girl. He hides after the risen Jesus has summoned him by name. He whines like a little kid whether John is going to die like him. And then after a decade of pastoral ministry, you would have thought that he's grown up. 

After a decade of pastoral ministry, he refuses to obey the ascended king's repeated demands to eat like a Gentile again, not once or twice, but three times. After that, he then chickens out in front of the Judaizers so that a young Paul must publicly confront him before the whole church. This is Peter who ambitiously argues that he is the greatest of all the disciples, again, not once, but even in the upper room just hours before Jesus dies. This is the same Peter who will irritably ask how many times he has to forgive all those nasty sinners who constantly make his holy life a living hell. And he asks Jesus ever so piously, seven times? Once a day? Will that do it? And Jesus responds, oh, Pete, how about let's start at 77 times. Now, does Jesus urge, this is where I'm getting, does Jesus urge such patience from pathetic Peter and yet not pardon you and I who relapse and repent and repent and repent? Would Jesus hypocritically order us to do what he is unwilling to do for us? What does he tell Peter there at the end of John's gospel? Feed my sheep, take care of my lambs. Do you understand that that's how Christ views us and if he views us as little sheep, how terribly small his expectations are of us? He's not looking to be impressed by us. 

The holiest hearts are thrilled over the tiniest sparks of God's grace and Jesus is the best example of that. I cannot be holier than he who refuses to break bruised reeds, who refuses to snuff out smoking wicks. Of all the things that love is in 1 Corinthians 13, love is above all patient and Christ is love. He goes so far and my friends, listen, Scripture makes me feel uncomfortable often. It says things that I tremble to say but do you understand that Christ is so large hearted that he even goes so far as to make excuses for those who genuinely struggle? What does he say about his men in the garden? I know, the flesh is willing, I'm sorry, the flesh is weak. Flesh is weak, isn't it? Romans 15, we who are strong have an obligation to bear with the failings of the weak. Is Christ not stronger than all? So then is he not obligated more than all to bear with our failings? How can you and I be proud when Christ is so humble? You remember when Jesus came up to the fig tree and he found not one single unripe fig in its branches and he cursed it. 

If Christ had found just one, one single little unripe fig on that tree, he would have boldly declared it fruitful. Fruitful. And sometimes the only unripe fruit that you and I find in the branches of our lives is the grief that we're not more fruitful, the grief that we don't see more fruit. And this is his grace. This is the evidence that he's keeping us. Have you noticed that you've found more sin than you've ever seen in your walk with Christ? Have you ever walked into a room that the curtains are closing off all sunlight and you throw open the curtains and all the dust particles just jump to life and dance in the room and you think, my goodness, this room just got super dusty when I opened the curtains. No. 

The room was always that dusty. It was the increase of light which revealed it to be so. You hate sin more than you ever have, but there's not more of it than there's ever been. God understands our groans. Romans eight, our desires cry out louder to our father than our sins do. Praise God. He heard Jonah in the bottom of the sea. 

He hears in the day of trouble, according to Psalm 50. And so Richard Sibbes says, let's not be cruel to ourselves when Christ is kind. Weak faith is real faith. Faint love is real love. Frail endeavor is real endeavor. He died for us as enemies. Will he reject us now that we grieve together with him over our sins? You see, Christ weans us off of our sins by wearying us with them. 

Our weaknesses don't break his wedding vows. Does he order husbands to love their wives as the weaker vessel only to break his own rule when we prove to be weak vessels? Oh, he cares for his bride. What does he command of us in Romans 12 verse eight? He says, the one who does acts of mercy must do so with what? Cheerfulness. Does he command us to be cheerfully merciful with one another and then himself grumble as he shows us mercy? No, this thrills him. Christ is thrilled to show repenting sinners mercy. That's sermon number one. Let's begin sermon number two. 

Adolf Hitler called his Nazi government the third empire. He was tracing the legacy to the Romans who occupied Israel. They enforced taxes by hiring traders from among the Jews who then amassed their fortunes with their own people. Tax collectors and tax collectors were seen as collaborators. They were collaborators with what have been to the first century Jew Nazis in their mind. The Romans, certainly the Messiah would come and crush the Roman empire, crush the tax collectors with his kingdom from heaven. Certainly this would be the case. 

Luke 15 verse one. Now all the tax collectors and the sinners were coming near him to listen to him. This is not what you expect. You do not expect the promised king to be someone tax collectors draw near to hear. What's wrong with this Jesus? Not only this, he's warning them of their sin. Why would you warn them? Just obliterate them. Just annihilate them. 

Where's the justice? Furthermore, he's dining with them. This is, this is absurd. Verse two, both the Pharisees and the scribes were grumbling. That is they were audibly groaning with disgust saying, this man receives sinners and eats with them. You could hear their disgust. If he was our king, he'd execute them all. So verse three, he told them this parable, which actually is three parables. 

What deserves three parables? What truth? That reality deserves three parables to communicate. Joy, joy, God's joy to save sinners. That deserves three parables. It thrills God to save something in each of these parables is lost. One frantically searches for it and then they explode with joy at its recovery. That is the refrain repeated in each of these three parables. Jesus concludes both of the first two parables saying, I tell you that in the same way, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over 99 righteous persons who need no repentance. 

There is joy in the presence, notice this, in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner who repents. Now if there's joy in the presence of the angels of God, then whose joy is it? Is it the angels? Oh, it's God's. It's God's great joy. And so today is not mainly about sinners who repent or the self-righteous who don't. Today the parable is mainly about what makes God happy. And it makes God happy to forgive repentant sinners and to keep forgiving them. So we see tax collectors and sinners and the younger brother. 

We see Pharisees and scribes and the older brother and we see our God in Christ displayed as the father. This is the King's final kingdom offer to the nation Israel should her leaders finally repent. What will they do? More importantly, what will we do? What will we do in the hearing of the word of Christ? Three points today. Number one, grieve with God over your sin. Verses 11 to 16. Repent and enter into God's joy. Verses 17 to 24. 

And then thirdly, rejoice with God over repenting sinners. Verses 25 to 32. First, grieve with God over your sin. Verses 11 to 16. And Jesus said, a man had two sons. You see this parable is about the man, not his sons. It's about the man. 

It's about him. Verse 12, and the younger of them said to his father, father, give me the share of the estate cast to me. Now, the firstborn inherits first. It's part of the reason why he's called the firstborn. He gets the first share, and Jewish wisdom prohibits anyone from distributing their inheritance while they are still alive. The inheritance, the word is literally the life. It's the father's life. 

It's what he's worked to accumulate and earn. And so this shameless teenager, we think he's probably a teenager, insults his father. And by requesting this, what he's saying, in fact, is you are better to me dead than alive. That's what he's just said to his father. It's a scandal. This would make anyone's blood boil as they listen to Jesus. And so he has gripped his entire audience, all of them, sinner and so-called saint. 

They're riveted. They're captured. They are on the edge of their seats. So I imagine Jesus paused here. So what's going to happen? So the man divided his wealth between them. This is unbelievable. He should have disowned this son, yet he grants his request. 

I mean, they're out of their seats. Now, listening to this parable, God allows sinners to run in their sin for a while. My friend, listen, if you've been running in sin, unrepentant, do not think that God overlooks. He allows sinners to run in their sins for a while. Verse 13, and not many days later. Okay, he's counting in days. That means it's not measured in weeks. 

In less than a week, the younger son gathered everything together. That is, he liquidated all his inheritance. He liquidated for the best price on Facebook marketplace. And he sells his father's fortune and then cuts anchor with home. Keep reading with me. He went on a journey into a distant country. That's not a country that borders Israel. 

That's outside Israel and then beyond the countries that border Israel, a distant country. As far away from God's word, as far away from God's people as his legs can possibly carry him, he wants no memory, nothing that could prick the conscience, nothing that could rob his happiness in his sin. He wants to hear nothing of it. He runs far from it. And there he squandered his estate. The word is Scorpizdo. People flee from scorpions, right? I don't know. 

Do you even have scorpions in the UK? I'm not sure. That's, that might be a California thing. People flee from scorpions. He, he, he made his money scatter. He squandered it all. He burns cash in the equivalent of Amsterdam. Like it's the end of the world. 

Like money is going out of style. He's just flipping dollar bills or pound bills or what? Call them bills? Pounds, coin. That's right. We've got coins here, don't we? He's living recklessly, Jesus says. Living recklessly. Literally, the word is not saving. He's not saving anything. 

He wasted everything. Verse 14. Now, when he had spent everything. That's his fault. A severe famine. This is God's doing. A severe famine occurred in that country and he began to be impoverished. 

Now, step back for a second. I know you're as riveted as Jesus's original audience. Step back for a second and look at the legalists rubbing their hands and whispering as Jesus speaks and they are saying, sweet justice. Finally, Jesus is telling us a parable with which we agree. This, this is what that man deserves. This is our religion. Thank you, Jesus. 

You are right on par. Finally, you might be our guy after all. They only see hopeless wrath. They are blind to the shepherd chasing his lamb and so is this boy. He can't see it. So verse 15, he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country. And he, the citizen of that country, excuse me. 

I'm messing with my mic too much. The citizen of that country, this pagan, this heathen, this Gentile sent this boy into his fields to feed swine. The language is that this young man is clinging to a Gentile master. He's desperate. He's helpless. He, he depends upon this new found master and he's forced to serve the vilest, unclean animals. This is the bottom of the barrel. 

You can't go any deeper in depravity and the consequences for it in the mind of a Jew than this. He's serving pigs. Wait a second. Jesus says, it gets worse. Verse 16, to the, to the absolute delight of the Pharisees and scribes, this young boy was desiring to be fed with the pods that the swine were eating and no one was giving anything to him. The, the image is that the workers are hitting him away from the pig's food. Hey, get off that man. 

Get off that. They're striking him away. And the Pharisees would undoubtedly sigh with relief. Yes. Yes. This is what sinners deserve. Verse 17, but, but no, no, don't do it. 

Jesus, they know he's going to wreck the whole thing. It's going so well. Don't do it. Jesus, don't disappoint us. Now you finally had a good one. But Jesus says when he came to himself, Oh, it's nails on the blackboard. When he came to himself, this is our second point, which is to repent, repent and enter into God's joy. 

Verses 17 to 24. But when he came to himself, many come to their wits end, but very few come to themselves. This young boy was brought by the grace of God to his senses, came to see sin for what it is. Why does he come to his senses? Except for the miraculous grace of God. Is this boy good? Is he good? Is he got a soft heart towards the Lord? Is he just spiritually sensitive? No, no, he's lost. But God has dispatched the hounds of heaven and they will have their day. They will find what they're looking for. 

And he said, how many of my father's hired men have more than enough bread, but I am dying here with hunger. Now notice this. This is a study in repentance. Notice this, he doesn't say, that's going to kill me. It's not. My dad's going to say, I told you so. It's not my father will demand reparations. 

Notice what drives his heart to repentance. What drives every repenting sinner to repentance is this. My father is good. What am I doing? My father is good. He generously feeds day laborers way more than they can even eat. They have more than enough bread. You see, hell is full of souls who scared to go there, invented a hard God for whom they worked. 

We do not repent until we are certain God loves to pardon, loves to pardon. You see, faith doesn't fear hell as much as faith fears refusing such lavish more than I could possibly ever require grace. That's a terrifying thought. Verses 18 to 19, here we go. Repentance isn't just, hey, I'm acting stupid. My father's good. No, it goes further than that, doesn't it? Verses 18 to 19, I will rise up instantly and go to my father and this is what I will say to him. 

See, he's mapping this out. His heart's in this. He's consumed by this. He's premeditating this. Father, I have sinned against heaven. You see, his crime is against God. He knows that. 

My crime is primarily against holiness, against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me as one of your hired men. Okay, read slow. The unrepentant will cry over what they've lost, but true repentance always weeps over what I have done. What doesn't the repentor plan to say? I learned my lesson. I've reformed myself. 

I promise to be good. That's not real repentance. That's religion. It'll send you to hell. No, father, I am a sinner. God knows and so do you. I want to ask you a question. 

What is your joy? What is your joy? Just Pastor Tom asked earlier. Have you found that God is greater than your heart? That God is greater than your sin? What's your joy though? Is it your performance? It's one thing to say, I love the church, but do you just love your ministry in the church? Do you just love the way that it feels? You just love the relationships? What is your joy? What's your delight? Is it your performances or is it Christ's? I've seen some young men whom I love and they're soundly in the Lord, but they were radically converted from a depraved lifestyle. The most grotesque lifestyle you can imagine. Perhaps some of you save from similar situations. This young man just blazed with meteoric rise in Christ and all of a sudden he didn't realize it. But I started to say to him, brother, I'm worried that you're taking more joy in how your life has changed than in Christ who bled and died, your soul to save. And guess what? Sure enough, he found himself in the mire again. 

By God's grace, he's repenting. He's enjoying the Lord. I'm so thankful. But that is a deception that will ruin us if we begin to delight in our performances rather than in the performance of Christ. He says, do not call me your son. Hire me as a day to day slave. See, the father was well staffed. 

He had servants that lived, were almost part of the family. They belong there. They were on salary, if you will. But he also, if there were other things that need to be done, there would be some other fellows that would come to the gate every morning and would knock on the gate and would say, hey, do you have any work that I could do? Just pay me day to day. That's what he's talking about here. He's not even talking about being a servant in the house. He's saying, hey, on a day to day basis, would you hire me? If I don't do well, you don't hire me the next day. 

But will you at least give me a chance as a day to day hire? That's where his heart is. I deserve less than that. You would be gracious to me to give me that low station. So verse 20, he rose up. See, it wasn't enough for him to just think these things in his mind and then sit there with the pigs. He rose up. He did exactly what he's premeditated to do. 

He rose up and he came to his father. Repentance is not just a confession. Repentance is a return to God, to be reconciled with God. This is probably my most favorite portion of the parable. Parable. But while he was still a long way off, he hasn't reached the village where he will be met with certain shame. He's not reached the village yet. 

He's not reached anyone's attention except one person's. His father saw him. Why is his father the first to see him? Why is his father the only one who sees him? No one cares. No, everyone's gone back to their business, but the father, it seems, has studied the skyline like a shepherd searching for his lost sheep. And here's the question we have to ask ourselves. Why is he studying the sideline? Is this father so defamed, so dishonored, so insulted, so concerned about his own reputation that he's eager to discipline this son upon sight? What does Jesus say? He felt compassion. He felt it. 

He felt compassion. His gut, the language is that his gut flips with sympathy at the sheer sight of his boy. And what is his instinct? He doesn't premeditate like his son has. He doesn't think it over. He ran. He ran. He sprints as if only to hasten their reunion by seconds. 

If he can shave off seconds before his boy is in his chest, he's going to sprint. What do the villagers see? Shame. Lords don't run. Villagers, they glide. They walk. Cowards run. Losers run. 

All shame in an instant flashes from what would have been this sinful son to a forgiving father. All shame is now on the father. And does he go to beat his son? Is he bolting out to beat his son? Compassion in that race, does it change to frustration? He embraced him. The language is that he wraps himself around his son's neck. He drapes himself on him. There were probably no lack for tears. Have you ever seen someone so overcome with emotion, overcome with such joy and relief that they collapse on someone else and there's just weeping, happy, weeping parents that have received their son home from war safely? This is worse than that. 

My son's soul was lost. And here he is and he falls on his boy. Oh, I've got him back. And he kissed him on his filthy head that's hung in shame on his dirty cheeks that are now wet with tears, kisses all over. There is not a single spot on this boy's head that is not smothered with markings of his father's lips. Verse 21, the son, this doesn't change repentance. God's grace doesn't change repentance. 

The son doesn't presume upon his father's kindness. He knows the father's kind, but he's going to do what he's premeditated to do. I'm going to tell my father what I thought of when I was brought to my senses and the pigs die. And the son said to him, father, I have sinned against heaven. And before you, I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Now, do you remember what the last line of his scripted speech was? Make me as one of your hired men. But does that make its way out the boy's mouth? We don't have that here. 

I'm no longer worthy to be called your son. And it's almost as if he's about to say, make me like one of your hired men. He can't get the words out because his father has stopped him and his father interrupts. His father won't have it. Verse 22, but, but sharp. That's a sharp, but, but the father said to his slaves, what does the father frantically order his slaves? Son, I love you. You're back. 

You're mine. Hold on one second. I need to take care of some business. And what is that business? What must be done this second? What interrupts his son's speech of repentance? Quickly bring out the best robe and put it on him. I mean, think about how many ways Jesus could have done this. It would have been amazing and yet would have been less than this. Bring out a robe. 

Bring out the robe and throw it to him and let him put it on himself. Bring out the best robe and you, my servants, put it on him. You put it on him. You serve him. I want there to be no aspect of my kindness that he can later when he's going to sleep question and think, oh, okay, well, dad didn't do this. No, he's lavish. This boy expects the servants apron and he gets dad's finest tuxedo and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet. 

He probably had sold his sandals. He's barefoot. He's probably sold his sandals or in times of severe famine, it was not uncommon to eat your sandals like beef jerky. You have that here in the UK, beef jerky. By the way, when I ask that, I'm saying that in a way that deprecates us Americans, beef jerky is maybe a little bit more lowly food. I realize that when I keep asking you, do you have that here in the UK, it sounds a little bit belittling. That's not what I mean. 

I love it here. He's got the family signet ring on his finger. Full sonship. Not work your way up. Not yeah, I'll take you up on your offer. Not you know what? You're back. Your back is part of the family, but you're going to be the dunce back there in the corner. 

No, he's got the signet ring. He's got full entitlement to all of the estate, even though he's already squandered his father's wealth. Full authority, full jurisdiction. The band is the official seal of the estate. Verse 23, and bring the fattened calf, slaughter it and let us eat and celebrate. He's gone from starving alone to a feast of prime rib. And I'm not going to ask you if you have that in the UK. 

Now bring out the veal, bring out the delicacies enough to feed dozens, if not scores of people. There is going to be, everyone gets joy, not just the son. Everyone present gets as much joy as the son by his welcome back. We all get to eat. We all get to feast because verse 24, this son of mine was dead. You know that they probably had had an actual funeral. The son was gone. 

He cut ties. He took the estate. They probably had an actual funeral service for this boy. He was dead. My son was dead and he has come to life. He's come back from the dead. He was lost. 

He was gone. He was forever gotten. He was irrecoverable. But somehow he's been found. The irrecoverable has been recovered. He is the occasion. Heaven erupts in party. 

Every time a sinner repents. Every time the sinner who once repented is continuing to repent. This is not just for the freshly converted. This is for you and I, brothers and sisters. Every time the Lord by his kindness brings us to repentance, heaven roars and God leads the anthem. They're watching him for all their indications because God has done a miracle yet again. Heaven is in constant party because across the globe at every moment, the Lord is either leading his people to repentance or he's leading a sinner to repentance for the first time. 

Verse 24, and they began to celebrate. They cheer. In case this son is questioning the authenticity of the servants and the other family members, are they just doing what dad's telling them to do? They cheer. You can't fake cheering. You can't fake standing ovation. Not this sort. That brings us to our final and most brief point. 

Rejoice with God over repenting sinners. Verses 25 to 32. Verse 25, now his older son was in the field. You forgot about him, didn't you? It's like Jesus brought him on stage, said, hey, I want you to remember this guy, then escorted him off stage. But here he comes back again. The outsider is now in, the insider is now out, but there is still hope. And when he came and approached the house, he heard music and dancing. 

You know how strange that must have been to him? God has been in a state of mourning since that stupid little brother of mine left. The father has hired out musical talent for entertainment. What is going on? Verse 26, and summoning one of the servants in the languages, it's a boy child. It's a child servant. He began inquiring what these things could be. You always go for a kid when you want to find something out. Kids say everything, right? All those folks, how many of you serve in like children's ministry here at Grace Life London? They're back there serving right now, right? It's because they want to hear about what's going on in your home. 

That's what they're doing. They're just asking all the kids, why are you going to children's ministry? So that's what he does. He pulls this kid out. He says, what's going on inside the house? I thought I'd see more of you run downstairs to go retrieve your kids. What's going on? Verse 27, he said to him, your brother has come and your father has killed the fattened calf because he has received him back safe and sound. You got to put yourself in his shoes. His friends have just grown tired of their mockery. 

They've been pestering him. Hey, how's brother doing? Got any postcards lately from little brother? How's your dad holding up? It's finally died off. He's finally been left alone just in time for brother's return. And dad honorably welcomes him. My dad has lost his mind. Verse 28, he became angry. This is uncontrolled, unbridled rage. 

I could share the Greek word with you, but the connotations that come with it would put a graphic image in your mind that wouldn't be edifying. Because originally this word meant uncontrolled, unbridled rage. You could feel it steaming off of him. And he was not wanting to go in. Can you imagine the sight? Just refusing. No. For this to say he's not wanting to go in, it almost, we get the sense that people are saying, come, come, come, come in. 

No. I'm not going in. My home is now unclean. I dare not step foot inside. Now watch what happens. His father came out and began pleading with him. You see the father pursues both sons. 

The son that's in sin and the son that's in self-righteousness, he goes out to both and pleads with them, pleads with them. Come, come, persuading his heart, not strict. He's not throwing his hand across the son's shoulders. He's not beating the son. He's not shaming the son. He's pleading with them. Come, come join. 

Come, come, come in. Does he have to beg the broken? No. But he must beg the boastful. But verse 29, that older son answered with a stern and decisive tone and said to his father, look, for so many years I have been serving you. Believe the languages, I've been slaving for you. And never have I neglected a command of yours. Do you hear that? Contrast repentance with pride. 

Repentance says, I'm not worthy to be called a son. Make me a slave. Pride says, I'm not your son. I'm your slave. That's what religion says. If that's how you see God, you've not learned the free grace of God in Christ Jesus. Legalism only sees God as an unfriendly slave driver. 

The only unrepentance in this parable is the really well-behaved child. And yet never, he continues, have you given me a young goat so that I might celebrate with my friends? Do you hear that? Do you remember that the older inherited with the younger at the beginning? The older probably got two-thirds the estate, and the younger probably got one-third. The father divided his wealth among them both. The father's got nothing. The sons have everything. This older son has received probably two-thirds his father's estate. And what does he say? You've never given me anything. 

You've never given me so much as a goat. He got filet mignon. You've never given me so much as a goat burger. And why does he want to party? Who does he want with him at his party? Dad, when's the last time you and I have sat down to a meal together? I just want your time. I just want to be with you. That's not what he says. I get nothing from you. 

I want to go party with my friends. He's just as disconcerting about his father as his younger brother had been. You see, religion is all about us. It's not about God. It's just wanting to party with your friends. Verse 30, but when this son of yours sees he's completely disowned his brother, when this son of yours came who has devoured your wealth with prostitutes, you killed the fat and calf for him. Translation, I hate that you love sinners. 

Your compassion on repenters, it's evil. That's what he's just said. Verse 31, and he, the father said to him, child, you are always with me and all that is mine is yours. I think he means that technically. That's not a sentimental statement. I think the father's saying, I've divided my wealth. All that's mine is yours. 

You own it. You've gotten everything. You've gotten my life. I've given you everything I've worked for. Your only grievance is that I love to forgive your brother and I would love to forgive you. I want you in with me. I want you to come in. 

I want you to be restored to your brother here. I want us all to be together. But verse 32, I love this. We had to celebrate. It's obligatory. It's mandatory. It is so central to the heart of God that God says, the free God, that never does anything that God does not will to do. 

God says, we've got to celebrate this. We must celebrate and we must rejoice for this brother of yours. He reminds him, he is your brother. This brother of yours was dead. Are you listening? Are you watching? Do you see this? He was dead and he's alive. He was lost. He's now found. 

Wake up, my son. And what would signal repentance in the older brother? I want you to think about this. It's not whipping himself. It's not better obedience. It's not better church attendance. It's nothing like that. Disciplines would be marked and obvious if this older brother was melted with compassion, shared in his father's joy. 

You're right. You're right. A sinner's been restored. Compassion over it, relief over it, celebration over it, rejoicing over it. And here's the question for the day. Does it thrill you? Does it thrill you to see God show grace to sinners? Now you might hear me and think, yeah, I love hearing those stories. I love when people come up and share their testimony about how God transformed their life and rescued them from a life of sin. 

No, no, no, no, no. See this is where I stopped preaching and I start meddling in your business. I mean this. Does it thrill you to see God show grace to that person in your home or in your workplace, the person that most offends you, the person that most hurt you, the person that most infuriates you? Do you love watching the grace of God go out to them and melt their hearts and tears at the love of God in Christ? That's the question that Jesus is asking the Pharisees and the scribes who are looking in. They're watching him as he's feasting with the younger son, the tax collectors and the sinners. And he's going, the door's open. Come in. 

Join us. Come sit down. Join me with them. I close with a statement that's been haunting me by Thomas Watson. He said in his doctrine of repentance, there are no worse natures in hell than we have. There are no worse natures in hell than we have. Family, we must celebrate saving grace on sinners. 

This parable deliberately ends open ended. So I guess that means it doesn't really end, but the door's open. Jesus doesn't bring this thing to a conclusion. His invitation is open. It's standing. It's breathing. If you're living right now, today is the day of salvation. 

Today is the day of God's favor. He opens up his kingdom and heaven will roar and applause as you enter. That's why we celebrate membership. That's what we do in membership is we're about to close with this recognition of members. If you've stayed outside of Christ, if you've stayed outside of committed membership to this local body, do you understand that this is what we're communicating as members? We're sitting at the table with our father and we're rejoicing as he brings sinners to repent into the righteousness of God and the grace of God in Christ Jesus. Let's pray. Father, we must celebrate. 

Thank you, Father, for giving us your son. Heaven now has no more to give. Oh, Father, we thank you that it thrills you to bring us constantly to recognize your love. Give us grace, Father, to aim all that is within our power against those things which make us distrust your love. Oh, Father, we thank you for all, everything. And we celebrate you in Christ's name. Amen. 

. 