---
title: "Silencing Fools and Wolves - Titus 1_12-16"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
 How do you tell the difference between an arsonist and an idiot? When I was a child, I know I've told you this story before, but we lived in a house with a long back garden and at the end of the garden there were the garages, beyond the garages, it was all just woodland and we loved it. Big open spaces of woodland to go and dig holes and make camps and light fires. We loved bonfires, nothing better than a good bonfire at the end of the garden. If my dad had rubbish to burn, we were the first to volunteer, we'll burn it dad. And we loved to have a bonfire. 

One of our favourite games was to get a stick and to wrap a plastic bag around it and to put it into the bonfire and melt the plastic and then when the plastic starts to burn and it's melting and it's burning and it's dripping, I can still hear the noise that it makes when that bit of burning molten plastic drips. It's like something from Star Wars, zoom, zoom, zoom as it drips. But they're burning and we loved nothing better than to walk around with a stick, a fire stick, and drip burning plastic. It's probably not very good for the environment, is it? There may be a hole over the ozone layer in that village in Kent where I grew up. I think it left a hole in my sister's hand once when a bit of burning molten plastic landed on that. 

I don't suppose she'll forget that. But we loved to go with our sticks and start fires. And we'd wander around dripping it in the dry undergrowth on the edge of the woodland and we'd start a little fire and then we'd stamp it out and we'd see if we could start a fire and then put it out again. And what do you say to that? You've got to say that is incredibly foolish, isn't it? I mean it is just idiotic. We got slightly burned a few times but we thought it was a game. 

And mercifully we were always able to put the fires out that we started. But can you imagine? Maybe you can imagine. This actually happens. Kids play with fire. And then some poor brave fireman loses his life trying to put out the fire that some idiot started. 

And I can only just thank God it wasn't me. But it happens. People lose their homes. People lose their lives. Just because people are idiots and play with fire. 

But then there's another kind of fire starter and this is an open secret in California. You know every year we see it on the TV and on the news it's just oh no wildfires. It's an open secret that a lot of those fires that consume thousands and thousands of acres of land and burn up hundreds of homes and cost dozens of lives, sometimes many lives in one year and the lives of brave firefighters. A lot of those fires are started on purpose by sick people. We call them sick people. 

I'd say they were evil people. Arsonists who just like starting fires. They just want to see the place burn. And you say well how do you tell the difference between an arsonist and an idiot? They both start fires right? That's the problem. Now in the church when it comes to people talking in church and starting fires with their tongue, how do you spot the difference between a fool and a wolf? That's the message really for today. 

There are wolves aren't there? Paul spoke to the Ephesian elders. You find this in Acts chapter 20. Acts chapter 20 he said in verse 29, after I know that after my departure fierce wolves, savage wolves will come in among you, he's talking to the elders of the Ephesian churches, not sparing the flock. They're speaking about people coming in from outside the church and coming into the church. So they're now in the church but they're going to ravage the flock. 

That's the problem. They're wolves. They haven't come to be part of the flock. They haven't come to be sheep. They've come to devour the flock. 

And then he says in verse 30, and from among your own selves, I mean these are the Ephesian elders. They're there gathered to say goodbye to Paul. They're weeping. They're all of them so sad to see Paul go knowing that they're not going to see him again. And then he says some of you are going to arise from among your own selves, among the elders will arise men speaking twisted things to draw away disciples after them. 

That's Acts 20 verses 29 to 30. So there is a danger from wolves, right? I mean just get it into your head as we start. Not everybody who is in the church setting is necessarily your best buddy, brother, or sister. Some of them might be wolves. Some of you are looking left and right and going, who's it going to be? On the other hand, not everyone who's a little bit rebellious, who, bit of an empty talker, bit of a smooth talker maybe, not everyone who's like that is a wolf. 

Would you agree? We talked last week about the problem of empty talkers and the problem of people who are a rebellious man and people who are, I called them just now smooth talkers, the entices of thoughts as I put it last week, people who can be very captivating in the way that they speak but can end up leading you astray. Not everyone who does some of those things is necessarily a wolf. And if you agree with that, that's where I greatly struggled with this passage because we tend to like things black and white, don't we? Most commentators and most people who preach this passage make it all about wolves. But there's, I believe, a tension in this passage that I couldn't get past. Certainly if you add up all these characteristics and make them speak about one particular person or make them about a particular group of people who have all of these characteristics, including the terrible motives that you see in verse 11, then I guess you found a way to spot a wolf. 

And you'll see if you go looking for very good evangelical sermons on this passage, you'll see titles like The Silence of the Wolves or you'll see titles like How to Spot a Wolf, How to Talk to a Wolf or Silencing False Teachers. And there's a lot here which speaks to that and is very helpful. But not everyone who bites is a wolf, are they? Sometimes sheep bite each other. And Paul had to warn the Galatians that if they bite and devour one another, they'd better watch out or they'll be consumed by each other. And you say, well, that's what wolves do. 

Wolves bite and devour and yes, but sometimes it's hard to tell whether someone's a badly behaved sheep or whether they're actually a wolf. Are you with me here with the tension? How many of you went away last week after I preached about the bad signs in verse 10 of being a rebellious person or being an empty talker or being a smooth talker? How many of you went away and said, oh, well, I've been rebellious and I've been an empty talker. So are you a wolf? And that's a real question. Maybe some of you actually went away asking that question. Am I a wolf? Could I be a wolf? Actually, I think this passage is really helpful to get us looking at ourselves because Paul has to help Titus deal in this passage with all kinds of different individuals in all the different congregations all over the island of Crete. 

That's the helpful context that helps us get to grips with this passage. And so instead of, I believe, instead of describing one particular group of people that he knows are the false teachers on the island of Crete, Paul just gives Titus a general description of some very bad signs in verse 10. It's what I dealt with last week. And it kind of stings a bit if you're someone who fits that description in some way or other, doesn't it? If you're a bit of a rebel, if you don't like submitting to authority, if you're sometimes an empty talker and you open your mouth when you really should keep it shut, if you find yourself sometimes starting fires with your tongue, so are you just an idiot or are you an arsonist? Are you a foolish sheep or are you a wolf? Either way, I'm going to leave the tension there, either way you need to stop starting fires, right? I mean that's pretty obvious, isn't it? Either way you need to be silenced and that's where we got to last week in verse 10 after giving us some very bad signs. Paul says in verse 11 that people who behave like that must be silenced. 

That was last week. We started talking about who to stop talking. Who to stop talking. The answer was basically anyone who's behaving like the descriptions we get in verse 10. Are you with me vaguely? I know it's hot and you're tired but give us a nod. 

Okay, good. You can smile if you don't know what I'm talking about. Well for today, today in the rest of this chapter from verses 12 to 16, I want to show you how Paul goes about dealing with the problem of fools and then how he recognizes the reality that some of those people are actually wolves. And then I'll end up trying to finish by helping you with some insight in how to tell the difference between a fool and a wolf. So if you're taking notes, I'm going to give you a little bit of a descriptive outline. 

First of all in verses 12 to 14, if you want to write down a heading, you might write down the heading, the danger from our culture in the church. The danger from our culture in the church. Because Paul in verses 12 to 14 is dealing with the problem on Crete from their culture. And that's where I'm going to talk to you about silencing fools. And then in verses 15 and 16, you could write down a heading like this, the danger from unbelievers in the church. 

In verses 15 and 16, Paul is dealing in these verses with the reality of the presence of unbelievers in the mix. And this is where I'm going to talk to you about silencing wolves. And then at the end of our time together, I'll try and draw it all together and talk a little bit about how to spot the difference. So, if you're with me, we're going to talk about fools, we're going to talk about wolves, and then we're going to talk about how to spot the difference. But I'm trying to give you this outline so you know what Paul is talking about, not just what I'm talking about. 

Okay, so silencing the fools, verses 12 to 14. Firstly, this is where we get to see the danger from our culture in the church. Because Paul is dealing with the, in these verses, with the problem that's created by the culture of Crete. And there are problems, aren't there, with every culture. Every culture has its own issues, and not all cultures are equal. 

Look at verse 12, the culture in Crete was very obviously awful. Look at this, verse 12, this is Paul quoting, one of their own Cretans, a prophet of their own said, and now he quotes Epimenides, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons. There you go, this is a nice quote to start the day with if you wake up in church on Crete and have Titus preaching to you. This is what the apostle Paul says, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy gluttons. Actually, it's not what the apostle Paul said, he's quoting Epimenides, and Epimenides was a poet from about 600 years, five, six hundred years earlier, sixth century approximately, BC, it's not quite clear exactly when he lived, but way back then. 

And it's kind of a sad take on their culture, isn't it? I mean, it's obviously a generalization, it's obviously a massive generalization, but what a sad reality. Now there are obvious problems with generalizations, aren't there? There are sometimes generalizations, however, that are actually true, generally, and that's what we're dealing with here. The other day I was in a pastor's prayer meeting and admin meeting, and I was talking, I mentioned the reality that when we British people think that something is a really bad idea, we might say something like, hmm, well that's interesting, I suppose you could do that. Which is a kind of a sarcastic, understated way of saying you're an idiot. If you do that, you're an idiot. 

Now I wasn't saying that talking like that was a good thing, I was, I think, commenting on something someone else said. I can't actually remember the context now, but then Mike piped up and pointed out the fact, he reminded me that I'd written an email to someone in America when he was on staff in the church there, and I'd said something along those lines about one of their plans. And they thought I was saying that's a good idea, carry on. And Mike had to interpret it for them and say, no, no, no, no, no, Tom's telling you don't do that because he's British and let me interpret for you. And well that was embarrassing because I was doing exactly the thing I was just saying British people do and shouldn't do. 

And I'm not saying it's a good thing to speak like that. I think it's a bad thing. I think we should say what we mean and mean what we say. I mean sarcastic, sarcastic understatement has its humour, but it also has its problems, especially in a multinational church like ours. People can completely misunderstand you. 

The point I'm making is that we tend to pick up problems from our culture that are there and we don't necessarily see them. And there are sometimes features of our culture that are really bad, but they've left their mark on us and we just do them without thinking. They can impact our behaviour even as Christians. What was it like in the churches on Crete, think about this now, in a culture marked by people who were liars, behaved like animals, evil beasts and were lazy glutton. Now Paul brings this up in the context of there being many people, he says in verse 10, many insubordinate, rebellious people. 

Many empty talkers, many smooth talkers who end up leading you astray. Now this is why now this reference to their cultural trends, why is Paul speaking about their culture now in verses 12 to 14? I believe there's a connection between the two. Let's talk about the connection with liars. Their culture was such that people from Crete, listen, were so used to lying that they often lied before they even thought about it. They were actually so famous for lying that there's a verb in Crete, kretidzein, which means, not a verb in Crete, there's a verb in Greek, the Greek verb kretidzein, which is taken from the name Crete, and we would translate it as something like to kretinise and it meant to lie. 

They were famous for lying to the point that if you wanted to say he's lying, you're saying he's kretinising. Now how do you think that tendency might show up in the culture amongst Christians in church? Well if words are cheap, what about how we speak to one another in church? You can imagine, can't you? Now let's think about the other issue, evil beasts. Cretans are always liars, evil beasts. People who act on instinct. Cretans were known for being, you would say, wild people, untamed, even vicious, evil beasts, but the word can be vicious beasts. 

Now is it any surprise that there were many people in the church who were insubordinate, unsubmissive, people who reject authority and any control in life in general and then they get saved and they're in the church and they don't just naturally immediately become submissive, ordered, self-controlled, orderly people, do they? They don't naturally submit to leadership if they've spent their life resisting anyone, telling them what to do, but then they're also typically lazy gluttons. This is the Cretan people in general, lazy, literally idle bellies. They were known, you would say, as a culture for being lazy, self-indulgent people. It's the opposite, isn't it, of being self-controlled, disciplined, hardworking. These were people who were famous just for following their feelings, doing what made them feel good rather than controlling themselves and working hard and putting themselves under self-discipline. 

Now, it is not my point to say that they were all like this. I'm not saying that. I don't believe Paul was saying that. See, Titus was told by Paul to pick out certain individuals on the island of Crete who were not like that. And you can actually compare this now to the list of qualifications that we've been through before and say, wow, Paul is going through these qualifications and he's picking out people who were so counter to the culture because they were so ruled by the Holy Spirit and the fruit of the Spirit was so evident in their lives that they would have stood out like a good thumb in a sore body. 

They would have just been the one healthy bit. Someone's beaten up all over and they're smiling and they say, well, my thumb's okay. I'm bleeding everywhere. No, but this is good. And they would have been the little bit standing out and you say, oh, he's all right. 

Let's pick him. He can be the elder. He's showing the fruit of the Spirit. He's self-controlled. He's able to teach. 

All these things. But by and large, in general, Crete was a mess. You're getting my picture? Now, my point here is simply to say that their culture had obviously left its mark on them. And that's a problem in a church, isn't it? Lazy people don't like the hard work of interpreting the Bible carefully, properly. They might be easily taken in by fanciful interpretations like the false teachers had. 

And they might start repeating that kind of nonsense in church rather than doing the hard work of learning how to rightly divide the word of truth. I mean, that's hard work. And if you're used to acting like an animal, it's easy to just go with your gut feeling, say whatever you feel at the time rather than restraining your tongue and being very careful only to speak that which is useful for building up and so on. If you're used to outright lying, if you've lived in a world where words don't count, you could easily end up talking when you shouldn't talk. Are you getting the point? I mean, it's easy for people in that kind of a culture to start fires all over the place with their tongue, isn't it? Not many people in a culture of liars, evil beasts, and lazy gluttons are going to learn how to tame their tongue. 

And so Paul pulls out this quote which they must have known to say, yes, Cretans, you have a problem. What do you say about a church where people in the church are behaving badly, but it's hardly a surprise because they've all just been dragged out of the swamp of their culture. My point here is what you say about people who behave badly in that setting is they're fools, okay? They're fools because their culture has left them as fools. When you compare them to the picture in the Bible of someone who's wise, when you compare them to someone who understands the wisdom about how to use the tongue, for instance, and you look at James chapter 3, you say, well, it's no surprise they're behaving badly, no surprise that they're behaving foolishly because they're all still kind of hung over after being drunk on their culture. And they need some sanctification, they need some wisdom, they need some biblical training and so on, and that's my point here is in Corinth, Paul had to rebuke the Corinthians. 

I'm not talking about Crete now, I'm talking about the Corinthians. He had to rebuke the Corinthians because they were all still taking each other to court. Why? Because in their culture, litigation was like sport, they just did that. And then Paul has to tell them, no, you can't do that, you're Christians now. In Ephesus, Paul had to talk to the Ephesians and rebuke them for their tendency to filthiness and crude joking and foolish talk, Ephesians 5. 

1. Let there be no filthiness, nor foolish talk, nor crude joking which are out of place, but instead let there be thanksgiving. Same pastors meeting, I have to ask my two pastor brothers to forgive me because in a moment out of my mouth came crude foolish talk. And I have to say, hang on, please forgive me brothers, that's out of place. Why? Because that's part of my culture. 

I mean, I don't normally talk like that, thank God, but it's still part of me and up out of my lips, out of the overflow of the heart, the mouth speaks. And you say, Tom, there's still the vestiges of your childhood in your sinful flesh. And I'd say, yes, I am guilty as charged. Stick around me long enough and you'll see other samples of it come up and I'll have to ask you to forgive me for those too as I try to continually repent of those influences on me and the reality of the sin which is still in my flesh, right? So this is us. Very helpful discussion point for Wednesday night is what are the defining sins of our culture, right? And how do they influence us? And we've all come from very different cultures in a church like this and how does your culture influence you and so on. 

That'll be very interesting. But now the question for us here in Titus chapter one is, what do you do with fools in the church? What do you do with people who are behaving foolishly in the church? We're going to learn a lesson, actually four lessons from Paul here. Look at verse 13, four lessons from Paul. What to do with fools? First up, don't be ashamed to acknowledge the sins of the culture you're in. Paul says, this testimony is true. 

That's pretty inviting, isn't it? Just coming from the apostle Paul, verse 13. Now secondly, don't hold back from correcting the sins of your culture. He says to Titus, therefore rebuke them severely that they may be sound in the faith. What do these people need? There's a bunch of them saying things they shouldn't say. And Paul says, it's no surprise because the whole culture is a mess. 

But then he says, so rebuke them severely. By the way, rebuke who severely? If you can answer that, you've cut your way through a whole load of mess in a whole load of commentaries. I think it's pretty obvious. I'm just going to go with the grammar. The nearest antecedent, that's the people he's just been talking about. 

It's the cretins, the cretins, the people. Rebuke the people. Presumably, he's going to be talking about people in church, the people in the congregations, the people he can speak to. Rebuke the people for their tendencies to insubordination, empty talking, their love of smooth talkers and so on, for their love of dishonest gain. If you look at the horrible motives at the end of verse 11, we'll look at those a bit later. 

But all these cultural tendencies that give source to the problems that come up in churches, they're just cultural sins that make them able to just go ahead and talk. So when they should not be talking. And so Paul says to Titus, look, do a pole washer on them, okay? I mean, just pull a pole washer and rebuke them sharply, severely, it says. You've got to do that, Titus, verse 13, in order that they may be sound in the faith. You want to see these people who've been dragged out of the swamp of their culture. 

You want to see them healthy, mature Christians, right? You want to see them like that. You don't want them led astray into sin and causing all sorts of problems because of their cultural tendons. So rebuke them severely. And that way, verse 14, they're not going to be paying attention to Jewish myths and the commandments of men who turn away from the truth. Now do you get this? Paul is telling Titus to speak to the people on Crete and the churches and rebuke them about these problems. 

And he's painting a picture of people who should not be allowed to speak. They need to be silenced. But now he's also telling everybody, he's telling Titus to rebuke everybody sharply because they're all part of the problem. It's no good acting like wild animals, being lazy thinkers, paying attention to these smooth talkers who want to talk about Jewish myths, verse 14, and the commandments of men, people who turn away from the truth. It's all very well saying that people who talk like that must be silenced and they must. 

But my point here is there's a cultural problem too. You can't sell drugs if nobody wants them. You cannot gossip if nobody wants to listen to you. You have to address both the person with the loose tongue and the people with itchy ears who want to listen to it, right? Grumbling and complaining don't go anywhere without people wanting and willing to join in and listen. And so I believe that's what Paul is doing here when he says to Titus to rebuke them, the Cretans sharply so that they may be sound in the faith, not paying attention. 

This is the listeners, not listening to these people who want to spout Jewish myths and so on. So I asked the question, what do you do with fools? And I've said here from Paul that we can learn, first of all, don't be afraid to acknowledge the sins of the culture and second, don't hold back from confronting those cultural sins to correct them. But now thirdly, you do have to go back to verse 11 and say, thirdly, you do have to silence the fools. People may just be foolish. But if they are starting fires with their foolish tongue, you do have to stop them starting fires, right? Just stop it. 

You may be an idiot, but you still have to stop. You can't say, oh, he's a fool. Just let him start the fires, poor little Johnny. He likes to play with matches. That's okay. 

He doesn't know better. No, you silence foolish talkers. And that's the point here. The word in verse 11 means to muzzle them or bridle them. It's talking about putting something on their mouths. 

We might say to gag them. In other words, don't let them speak or don't let them keep speaking. Now obviously, you can't stop people speaking if they're outside the church setting, can you? But you can within the church, with proper authority in the church, you can prevent people from having a platform. You can prevent them from continuing to have a platform. If they do have a platform, but they persist in being foolish in their speech. 

Obviously they have to be stopped. So four lessons in how to deal with fools from verses 11 to 14. Number one in verse 12, acknowledge the impact of the culture. Number two in verse 13, confront the cultural sins. Number three in verse 13, rebuke the foolishness of the crowd. 

Number four in verse 11, silence the voices of the fools. Okay. So we've been talking about the impact of the culture and silencing fools. Now what about the wolves? Now what about the wolves? And in verses 15 to 16, I want to talk to you about silencing wolves. And I think this is talking about the danger from unbelievers in the church setting. 

Paul is dealing in these verses, I believe, with the reality of the presence of unbelievers in the mix. And this is where I'm going to talk to you about silencing wolves. So if you're with me, this is number two in our outline. I'd like you to look at verses 15 and 16. And this is difficult, I understand, to follow his flow. 

I've wrestled greatly with this text over the last few weeks and intensely in the last couple of weeks. To the pure, all things are pure. But to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. But both their mind and their conscience are defiled. They profess to know God, but by their works, they deny him being detestable and disobedient and unfit for any good work. 

Now you wouldn't describe a believer as detestable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work, would you? This is talking about unbelievers, and it says it quite clearly. They are unbelieving, defiled and unbelieving. It's talking about people who are in the mix, and yet they're defiled and unbelieving. And then there's this strange quote or saying at the beginning to the pure, all things are pure. But to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. 

It's a very balanced statement in Greek. It kind of is almost poetic. All things are pure. To the pure, to the defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. And then it goes on after that balanced statement to say, but both their minds and their consciences are defiled. 

Now a little bit of explanation for this, I think, comes when you realize that if you go back briefly to verse 10, and this is the description that I left out at that point, and I am coming back to it deliberately now to try to help you to tie this whole passage together. Verse 10 highlights three types of, three bad signs of people who should be stopped from talking. Rebellious men, there are many rebellious men, empty talkers, it's another bad sign, and deceivers, the entices of thoughts, the smooth talkers who lead people astray. And then Paul says, especially those of the circumcision, the circumcision, and you start to get the realization that there's a group of people on Crete who are those of the circumcision who are causing special problems in the churches, and you're right if you get that picture. Look at verse 14, he talks about people needing to be sound in the faith, verse 13. 

Verse 14, not paying attention to Jewish myths and the commandments of men who turn away from the truth. And so you get the picture that on the island of Crete, there were people who were of the circumcision. By the way, that's not a saying that means that they were necessarily legalists, like in Galatians, people who are saying you've got to be circumcised otherwise you're not saved. I don't believe that's the setting here. There's many occasions in the New Testament when that phrase of the circumcision, like in Acts 10, 45, I think it is, maybe at 10, 15, Paul said to the. 

. . Peter is talking about the people who are of the. . . 

believers from among the circumcision who were up in. . . who went with him up to Cornelius' house in Caesarea and were amazed when they saw the Holy Spirit poured out on Gentiles. And that phrase of the circumcision is just a long way of saying someone's a Jew, someone's from that group of people who are circumcised. 

That's how I believe it's being used here. Very simply he's saying there are especially. . . there are Jewish people on the island of Crete who are bringing with them these Jewish myths and the commandments of men who turn away from the truth. 

Now Jesus dealt with people, didn't he? He said, Isaiah spoke well of you hypocrites who worship me with your lips, but your hearts are far from me. And he talked about people who set aside the commandment of God and teach as doctrines the commandments of men. And that was just a reality that among the Jews there were people who got all kind of crazy about fine details from Jewish culture and tradition and wanted to teach them like doctrines. You've got to have this. This is what the Jews did. 

Can you imagine the influence amongst Greek Christians on the island of Crete? They've just been saved. And they've been saved, they've been grafted into the original ove tree. And they're thinking, hey, hang on a minute, now I'm connected to Abraham somehow. And then there's a Jew who says, yeah, and I'm a literal descendant of Abraham and now let me tell you a thing or two about how we Jews do things. Let me just tell you how to pronounce the name of Jesus properly to start with. 

I mean, let's go there, shall we? And let me just tell you a few things about how and so on and so on. And you can imagine how people get carried away with Jewish myths and traditions. Let me tell you about some dietary stuff you need to know because you guys, you just crawled out of the swamp of your culture on Crete. And I'm a Jew, so let me tell you a few things. And you can imagine the impact on Jewish Christians in those settings. 

Now there's a problem there and Paul is warning them about that problem. But now there's this reality as well that mixed up with those people who are spouting Jewish myths were people who actually were not believers, but who were taking opportunity of this crowd of people to come and, yeah, here's my platform to teach my teachings and put forwards my ideas, but actually they're unbelievers. And I think the hint here for us, if you want to come back to verse 15 and say, why is Tom talking about all this? The hint here for us is in the language Paul chooses when he says, to the pure, all things are pure. Now, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure. Now that language about being pure speaks about ritual purity and can speak about things being morally acceptable. 

Sorry, it speaks about moral purity and talks about things being ritually acceptable, things which are pure and acceptable or things which are defiled and unacceptable. Now that makes you think about food laws, doesn't it? This was a huge problem. If you want to think for a moment about Colossians in chapter 2, it was a huge problem in the New Testament churches. If you just want to go briefly to Colossians chapter 2, in verse 16 Paul is telling the saints in Colossae, therefore no one is to judge you in food and drink and in respect to a festival or a new moon or a Sabbath day, things which are only a shadow of what is to come, but the substance belongs to Christ. If you would jump down to verse 20, if you have died with Christ, the elementary principles of the world, why as if you were living in the world, do you submit to yourself to decrees, do not handle, do not taste, do not touch, which deal with things destined to perish with use, which are in accordance with the commands and teachings of men, which are matters having to be sure a word of wisdom in self-made religion and self-abasement and severe treatment of the body, but of no value against fleshly indulgence. 

Now I'm just pointing that out. This was a general problem in the churches. There were Jewish people coming in and coming with these dietary regulations and stuff and saying, guys, you've got to submit to all this stuff. You can't just be eating pork. I'm sorry, bacon is off the menu. 

You've got to be, you've got to be pure. And yet Jesus had declared what? All foods clean. Now if you were morally pure, if you were truly saved, Paul is saying in this first phrase, to the pure, all things are pure. He says that repeatedly elsewhere. I'll just leave you to go investigate that for yourself and check it out. 

But then he says to the defiled and unbelieving, if you are actually unsaved and you're defiled and unbelieving, nothing's pure. You just can't make anything pure ultimately, but both their minds and their consciences are defiled. So are you with me? Stay with me. I know it's hot. Let me just summarize it for you. 

What's he saying? He's saying that look, there are these people and some of them, they're spouting these Jewish myths and they're spouting commandments of men. Now some of them may be fools, but then there's the reality, there are some people, you've got to face this reality, who are defiled and what's the word? Unbelieving. Both their minds and their consciences are defiled. These people are not on the same page, but they're in the mix. And that's my point because in verse 16, he's talking about people who profess to know God. 

So they're there saying, yes, we know God, but by their works, they deny him being detestable, disobedient and unfit for any good work. Now what am I saying? I'm saying that, okay, we've got to face this reality. We've got to face this reality. And this is, I guess you could say the first lesson from what Paul teaches here is to face, acknowledge the reality that there will always be some among us who do not actually truly believe, whose hearts are not made new. They're still under the law in their own minds. 

They're still trying to compete to make sense of it all and to work their way to God. They're still trying to submit to regulations and then impose those regulations on others. And they're in a mess, but they're in the mix. And I guess the first thing to do is just to actually acknowledge the reality of that, but also acknowledge that these are people who may be wanting to teach, who may be wanting to speak, teaching things they ought not to teach for the sake of dishonest gain. Verse 11. 

And what are you saying, Paul, about these wolves? What do you have to do to them? Well, the point that is really simple, and you got it really from the title of the sermon, is that both the fools and the wolves must be what? Silenced. Silenced. Okay, you can go home. Well maybe you want to stay and find out a little bit about how to spot the difference between a fool and a wolf, right? Because we've made the point, how do you know if they're wolves or fools? How do you know if someone's starting a fire deliberately? Or if they're just an idiot with a box of matches and a plastic bag and a stick? Okay. Thirdly, I'm going to say that there are clues in the text here for us. 

This is going to be a little bit like Little Red Riding Hood. You know Little Red Riding Hood? Grandma, what big ears you've got. All the better for hearing you with, dear. Grandma, what a big mouth you've got. So, so is this a wolf or is it grandma? And what I'm saying is there are clues in the text. 

Number one, we need to look out for the bad signs, okay? Look out for the long ears, look out for the big nose, look out for the sharp teeth. We've got to look out for those things. And what are they? Verse 10, okay, the clues are someone might be rebellious. You know, oh Tom, you started here last week and I'm rebellious sometimes. Yeah, okay. 

I'm saying this is a bad sign. Look out for the bad signs. Humbled people, if people are truly saved, they will ultimately submit to Christ's authority, won't they? Now, I told you before, a lot of people preach this text and it's all about identifying wolves. And I get the point. Now that's the point I'm trying to make, but I wanted to make the other point last week and to reinforce it for you. 

But let me give you a quote from a sermon by a wonderful preacher called Don Green. Don Green used to be at Grace Community Church for a number of years, pastors his own church. I've just forgotten where it is. You remember where that is? No. Anyway, pastors his own church, Ohio, did you say? Ohio. 

He's a great preacher, listen to his sermons, go look him up, Don Green. He wrote, he preached two messages on this, how to speak to a wolf. And he said in order to silence a wolf, you need to be able to spot him. And I'm quoting selectively just to shorten it a bit, but I'll give you a long quote. Paul here in this passage shows us how to do that so that we can know who it is to be silenced. 

These are the ongoing marks of a wolf. Now note that he makes the point very early in his sermon that he's not talking about immature people. He's not talking about someone who just talks out of turn and basically shows their foolishness, which is the way I've said we need to think about this in the first part of the sermon for ourselves. But he's saying these are the ongoing marks of a wolf. Talking about being rebellious or insubordinate, let me quote him again. 

Paul calls attention to their rebellion. They undermine confidence in the God appointed authority in the local church. They come in and undermine that, sometimes with open assaults like cannons attacking the foundations of a fortress, sometimes with subtlety like termites, just quietly infesting and undermining the strength and the stability of that which the local church is built upon. But you can note a wolf, you can spot a wolf by their insubordinate rebellious attitude towards church leadership. They think they know better. 

They undermine, and I'm supplying what he left out, your leaders by saying things like, why did they do that? You know, what he said there wasn't right at all. Then he talked about the fact that wolves often sit in the back row and he made a joke about that. But he made a joke because he said they, and then I'm picking up his quote, he said they depend on operating in the shadows, quietly whispering, quietly showing the fact that they are in opposition to church leadership. When you start to hear something like that, be on guard, say, uh-oh, uh-oh, now wait a second, you're kind of new here, haven't seen you here before. And I'm hearing strange sort of rebellion. 

What are those pearly things coming out? Are those the fangs of a wolf that I see? That I detect? What is this growl from inside you toward the leadership of the local church? Paul says they're rebellious men, they're insubordinate. When you start to see trends of that, be on guard. This is Don Green, just a long quote. And then he talks about empty talkers. You can spot a wolf by his empty talk. 

A wolf loves his pet theological issues, but ultimately his talk is unprofitable. They have a big tongue, but their arms are a little bit short to reach the plow to help with the work. Or sometimes their arms are just a little too short to reach the wallet in their back pocket. They want to teach, they have lots of things they want to say, but when it comes to actually being involved in constructive deeds that help people in the life of the body, and actually supporting the pre-existing work that they came upon, you don't find them. They might show up Sunday by Sunday, but when it comes to work, they're all talk. 

Be on guard for people like that. Stop and think, is this man a doer or just a speaker? Does he just talk? James said faith without work is dead. You know, just empty talk. They love to talk. They want to teach. 

They want you to listen to them. They've got 10 things they're always ready to talk about, but all told it proves to be empty babble. When you really step back and look at it, it's just empty babble, usually over something insignificant. And then they try to magnify into a great issue. Empty talk. 

Pay attention to that. Do you get the point? I'm going to say go listen to a sermon, it's great, but these are bad signs, the big ears, the big nose, the big mouth that help you to spot a wolf, but maybe just somebody's a bit of a fool because he's just growled out of the swamp and he's still doing that stuff, right? Are you with me? There are people who are wolves who are empty talkers. There are people who are wolves who are smooth talkers who entice you, who captivate you in your thinking and lead you astray. And the key feature to help you identify them at that point is the reality that they're going to lead you away, astray from the fellowship, astray away from the teaching which is the teaching, the main thing, the plain thing, the teaching which is in accordance with sound doctrine. Someone trying to steer you away from that stuff and get you sidetracked into myths and the commandments of men. 

Don't follow them. Whatever you do, they need to be silenced. They can be like the Pied Piper, but whatever tune they're playing, it's not good, right? If it leads you away from safety. Okay. So number one, look out for the bad signs. 

Number two in our list of how do you spot a wolf? How do you tell the difference? Look out for bad motives. Look at verse 11. I said I'd come back to this. I'm going to be very brief now. We're just tidying this up. 

Says in verse 11, teaching what they ought not to teach for the sake of dishonest gain. There's always something in it for them. Now typically false teachers, what's it going to be? Okay, money, sex, power. Okay, those are the top three on my list as well. It may not be any of those by the way. 

Some people just love the attention, don't they? Some people just cannot exist without being the center of attention. And if nobody is listening to them, they just can't live almost. And so they have to talk and have people listen to them. They crave people's attention to them. They're not trying to have your attention on Christ. 

They're not serving Christ. Who are they serving? They're serving themselves. They're not serving the body of Christ. They're not all about this passion for Christ's body, the church. If only I can see the church built up, the church secured, the church protected. 

No, they're about their pet thing that they want to lead you away. And if that means taking you away from the church, that's fine. If that means damaging the church, don't worry about the church, worry about my pet issue. That's a bad sign, isn't it? Bad motives come to the fore at a moment like that when people don't fear harming the church because it's not about Christ and his church, it's about them. Now, you could look out thirdly for a bad response to correction. 

And this is three out of four. This is really, I think, the clincher. Although there's still number four to come, I think this is the clincher. In verse 11, he says, these must be, what's the word, silenced. Okay, so if someone's an idiot and they're starting fires with their foolish use of their tongue and you say to them, hey man, listen, you're starting fires. 

Have you realized that fires hurt people? Look, read James chapter three, fires hurt people, right? This is really damaging. You've got to stop talking. But they won't stop talking. They just say, no, no, I'm going to start fires if I want to. Well, is that person, that's a bad response to correction, isn't it? What do you say about someone like that? Ultimately, if they refuse to submit to correction, you've got to say this person is not a submissive person. 

This person won't be silenced. Verse 13, rebuke such people sharply. But these people won't accept rebuke. It's then your fault because you're telling them they're doing something wrong. Turn over to chapter three for a moment in Titus. 

And this is really interesting. I've spent, again, a long time just trying to work out. Am I really right here? And I came to the conclusion that Titus, at the end of chapter one, switches in chapter two to how to set in order what remains. But in chapter three and verse eight, he comes back to this same subject that he's just dropped in chapter one and verse 16, when Paul tells Titus, but avoid foolish controversies and genealogies and strifes and conflict about the law, for they are unprofitable and worthless. And then in verse 10, he says, reject a factious man after the first and second warning, knowing that such a man is perverted and sinning, being self-condemned. 

What's he saying at the end of it all? He's saying, look, if you have got someone in the mix and they're talking and they're trying to create their little group. This is Romans chapter 16, isn't it? Verse 17, Romans chapter 16 verse 17, he talks about this problem of division. He says, now I urge you, brothers, to keep your eye on those who cause dissensions and stumblings, contrary to the teaching which you learned, and turn away from them. For such men are slaves not of our Lord Christ, but of their own stomach. And by their smooth talk and flattering speech, they deceive the hearts of the unsuspecting or naive. 

These are people who are gathering around themselves followers, but they're gathering around themselves followers in order to lead them away, astray. They're causing a division in Christ's body and they're not afraid to do that. And Paul, so Paul says to Titus, he talks about these people and says, you must silence them, you must silence them. Do you know if they're a fool or are they a wolf? Just silence them. Now you, Titus, teach these things, and he starts in chapter two, verse one, he keeps going telling Titus what to teach. 

And in chapter three, verse nine, he picks up the same issue and he says, you know what, avoid all these foolish controversies and so on, but now a factious person, someone who wants to make a big deal out of it, someone who won't shut up, someone who won't be silenced, what do you do with them? Well, you have to reject someone like that after the first and second warning. You warn them, you speak to them, you try to silence them, they won't have it. You try to, you remonstrate with them, you go back, you plead with them, you try to show them the danger of what they're doing. You're starting fires. People are being hurt. 

And they just, they won't have anything to do with it. After that, rejects the factious man, he says, verse, where am I? I'm still in Romans, Titus three, verse 10, verse 11, rejects a factious man after the first and second warning, knowing for you can be sure that such a man is perverted and sinning being self-condemned. He's warped, he's sinful, he's self-condemned. That's not a believer, that's a wolf. At that point, you have to reject them, right? Are you with me? So I'm going to say that the third lesson we learn from Paul at this point is, okay, you got to first of all just acknowledge the reality of wolves, of unbelievers in the mix. 

But then you look out, in order to identify them, you look out for the bad signs, you look out for bad motives, you look out then for a bad response to correction. Are you with me? People won't respond well to correction, they won't ultimately submit to godly rebuke. That's a really bad sign, isn't it? Then lastly, you look out for bad works, verse 16, Titus one, verse 16, they profess to know God, but by their, what is it? By their works, you shall know them. That's what Jesus said, isn't it? By their works, they deny him in this case. By their works. 

So you've got ways to spot a wolf. I'm going to say it ain't always easy. Do I hear an amen from the pastors in the room? Do I hear an amen from some of you too? I mean, it isn't easy, is it? Now can I just say this in finishing? We do not want to be, I don't want to be pastor old McDonald who had a church and sang e-i-e-i-o and then here a wolf, there a wolf, everywhere a wolf wolf, right? I don't want to be that pastor. If I see you behaving like a wolf, I'm going to assume that you're a stupid sheep that needs a bit of help, right? That's the position we've always taken. We don't want to be the church that only sees wolves. 

Like the boy who cried wolf, there's a wolf, there's a wolf, there's a wolf. And finally there is a wolf and nobody believes you and the wolf comes and eats you and the sheep, right? That's the Aesop's fable. We don't want to be the boy who cried wolf, the church who cried wolf. We don't want to be the pastor old McDonald, but we have to recognize the reality that there are wolves, right? We've got to deal with it, hold out with it, we have to face it. How do we face it? How do we deal with this? We've got to silence foolish talkers. 

We've got to silence people who do this. Just let's obey this. And we carry on and we watch and pray to see people turn from their foolishness, don't we? We say, yeah, we've all got baggage, right? We've all come into this Christian life with sinful habits and sins that we don't even see because we're blind to them because that's our whole life before we were saved. And so we're going to see that amongst ourselves and we don't jump on it all and say, you're a wolf, I saw a fang. But we're going to watch out and we're going to keep savvy and we're going to pray. 

Aren't we going to pray for your pastors? Ultimately, it's going to be the job of the pastors to deal with the wolves when they come. That's why shepherds have a shepherd's crook. They have that to grab a wandering sheep and to bring them back to say, no, no, not that way. And they have them to fend off the wolves. And you've got to pray for us for wisdom because sometimes we don't know who we're dealing with. 

Father, we pray that you would give us wisdom. You would give us great clarity. But Lord, we pray that you would deal with us all the sins that we bring into our Christian lives. Please highlight to us. Please change us, whatever they are, change us. 

Show us our sin. Show us more than that. Show us our Savior. Show us Christ. Lord, we love you because we see nothing wrong in you. 

We see so much wrong with ourselves. Help us to be the church that loves each other, that is unashamed to admonish one another, to encourage one another, to teach one another. But Lord, deliver us from false teachers and from foolish speech, we pray. In Jesus' name, Amen. . 