---
title: "The Elders' Job Description： Understanding Biblically What Elders Should Be Doing Pt 2 - Bible Study"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
prayer. You just tell me when we're live. Yes? Okay. Well, welcome to you. Welcome to our midweek Bible study. 

We normally meet around the city to discuss the sermon and I kind of wish we were doing that this week because on Sunday, Psalm 62 had so much for us, had so much for me that I just felt like, okay, we need to stop and discuss this. I'm hoping that you can still do that amongst yourselves. I did send out one song to the fellowship group leaders. I don't know whether you got it in your group, but Sovereign Grace have done a version of Psalm 62 that's just been blessing my soul as I reflect on that sermon. It's been ministering to me. 

I hope that the Psalm and the song and some questions will minister to you. Feel free to pose those questions in your groups. If your fellowship group leaders can't handle them, then maybe you can actually have a discussion in your online groups. But if your fellowship group leaders get stuck over a question, they can always ping them to us and we'll try to give you the best answers we can. But tonight is going to be focused again on really studying out this issue of what should elders do biblically? So what is an elder's job description? That's what we've begun to study last week and this week. 

And last week I gave you a whole mess on the board or I cleaned it up and sent it out to you as a nice pretty mind map, not this one. That's the one I'm working from this week. That's what you'll see on the board at the end or vague representation of it. But you'll be able to find that in your fellowship group on the church app. So you can have a look at last week's image, cleaned up. 

I'll talk about that in a moment briefly. But for tonight the plan is to move on from our study last time. We looked at 12 different texts last time, 13 in total actually with the central one. And we tried to kind of cover the idea of looking at it, I suppose you would say inductively. Let's go to all the texts in the Bible that talk about what elders should be doing and let's just draw from them all the activities that elders are supposed to be engaged in. 

And then we listed them out and I just said, well look, that is what the Bible says. It's quite interesting because it often contrasts with our expectations about what elders should be doing. Tonight's going to be a little bit similar. I'll pray and then we'll get stuck into a study. But tonight it's going to be more systematic. 

I've tried to organize the different activities that elders are supposed to be doing according to the Bible. Tried to organize them into some kind of categories which I believe are biblical categories. And I'll try to set that out for you as we go and hopefully that will be of interest for you. And from that we're going to dive down into what we actually do with our time. I'm going to contrast that a little bit with the expectations that people have. 

And we'll talk a little bit about how elders need to divide up our responsibilities in order to be sane, survive and serve you rightly. So that's the plan for tonight. It's going to be more of a Bible study but we still need the Lord's help, don't we? So let's pray. Let's get into it. Father in heaven, we really do need your help. 

More than anything we need the help of your Holy Spirit. We need your forgiveness. We ask you now to forgive us our sins, to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Oh Lord, wash us, change us, help us. We pray Lord with respect to this issue of what elders should do as we think about appointing elders, nominating and considering elders in our own congregation as we look at the whole question of what we should be focusing on as elders in the church. 

Lord we pray that all our thinking would be reformed, reframed according to your word. Help us to be more and more and more biblical, more and more and more pleasing to you. We pray that we would gain insight but Lord that you would change us by it, that we would be moulded as a church into a church that is pleasing to you even in our structure and even, but especially in the activities that we focus on. Help us to do that which you would have us do and help us as we evaluate people Lord to be able to see the people who would, you would have gifted and enabled to do this kind of work in Jesus' name. Amen. 

Okay, let me turn you just to start with in the Bible to Acts and I want to point out to you again the passage that I sent, I focused on last time because we're asking the question what should elders do? What's a biblical job description for an elder? And the book of Acts I believe gives us the heart of the matter. In Acts chapter 6 when the disciples were increasing in number, verse 1, there was this complaint by the Hellenists because their widows were being neglected in the daily distribution. There was food distributed, it was famine conditions, and the 12, that's verse 2, the 12 apostles that is summoned the full number of the disciples, they got everyone together and they said it's not right that we should give up preaching the word of God to serve tables. I'll just stop there for a second. One question that caused a little bit of heat in some of the fellowship groups, at least one of the fellowship groups last week was a comment I made about small church and big church and I would just point out again if I may that big church is not unbiblical, this is Jerusalem. 

There are tens of thousands of people in the church at this point and in verse 2 it says the 12 summoned the full number of the disciples. In other words they all gathered. Now the archaeologists will tell you oh there weren't these meeting places that they could have met in. Well, yaboo to that. I say I believe the Bible, I don't know where they gathered, whether they gathered in the temple grounds, you could get a lot of people around there. 

There are open spaces around Jerusalem where people could gather, and did gather. Jerusalem was flooded with hundreds of thousands of people at certain points in the year. It's not beyond reason to say the church gathered like this as a whole and I'm just saying I believe what it says here when it says they summoned the full number of the disciples. Okay and they said it's not right that we should give up preaching the Word of God to serve tables. What was the greatest need of the great numbers of new Christians that were growing and fellowshipping and devoted to the apostles teaching and to prayer and so on. 

What was the great need? The great need was preaching. They mustn't give up the preaching to serve tables. There was these practical issues that could have dragged them down and you would say entangled the apostles in other things. Now I'm going to say I don't know all about that because every time I try to prepare ministry to preach the Word, I engage in warfare. You maybe don't know what I'm talking about but I have to fight all sorts of enemies. 

Number one enemy in my warfare is me. I have to fight myself to discipline myself to study to prepare food for you. Otherwise I'd be getting up here on Sundays and just having to make it up and you're many of you very painfully familiar with that kind of ministry. But the effort required to be devoted to preaching the Word of God is enormous and every time as a minister you engage in that kind of effort, you've got the enemy of every single soul in the church set against you. You've got the devil and his emissaries trying to distract you, trying to divert you, trying to cause problems that will just weigh you down. 

Sometimes when problems come up, I have to fight inwardly with this tendency to want to say get behind me Satan, so the person who's bringing up the problem. I do fight it. I never say that but inwardly I realise that there's a warfare going on and sometimes it seems so bizarrely beyond coincidental that I'm left thinking well okay I'm engaged in spiritual warfare here and this person has no idea but I have to be devoted to preparing to preach the Word and it's really difficult because other stuff crowds in. Now it can be legitimate stuff like this but the solution for them was to delegate and they appointed these disciples. They spoke to the congregation and they said pick out from among you seven men of good repute, full of the spirit and of wisdom whom we will appoint to this duty but verse four, look at verse four, but we will devote ourselves to prayer and to the ministry of the Word. 

So okay let's just start here. I said last time at the very heart of the ministry of elders is the idea of prayer and the Word. I put, I'm really not doing very well with this wobbly board. Let me start again and try to hold it still whilst I write. So let's put here praying and wording. 

That's what I put down as the two kind of central activities based on Acts chapter six verse four. So Acts six four gives us I think the heart of the job description of elders and it's very interesting isn't it? What would you say would be the heart of the job description of elders in most people's minds? I think most people think of the heart of the job of elders as being well obviously evangelism and missions and preaching and counselling and meeting with people but very rarely do they put prayer right at the heart of the job description of a minister, of an elder, of a pastor. And so I'm saying that right at the heart of it is something which is counter cultural but the counter cultural nature of what we do, the opposite to expectations nature of what we do doesn't stop with the idea of us being devoted to prayer. Let me give you a few. So I'm going to sketch out for you a few areas of the life of an elder and I'm going to ask you what you think an elder should do in those areas. 

So let me just put here this is going to be what's biblical up here and down here somewhere we'll put our let's say popular expectations. So what do you think are the kind of main areas that people would expect their elders to be involved in pursuing? Well obviously one main area that elders would be expected to pursue is their own personal walk with God right? So let's put their personal walk. What about the whole business of preaching? How are preachers supposed to come up with their sermons? Well let's put down here study for sermons. Now I'm being very kind to you because you're kind of half awake. This is a beautifully creaky board isn't it? If I just do that then you can all get used to it and we'll move on from there shall we? What else should pastors be doing according to most people's minds? You can talk to me. 

Just shout it out. You don't need your hand up or anything like it. I have said some of this. So evangelism well done. What was it you actually said? Hospitality okay. 

Let's put down here hospitality. So what else? Keep going. Counselling okay. Counselling. Obviously you expect pastors to be overseeing especially if they're called bishops. 

Overseer that's where we get the word bishop from. Actually all shepherds are overseers. What about their family life? Personal walk. Should we put down here? Let's put it over here family. Should they be focused on their own family, leading their own family in godliness? You'd all say yes of course you would yeah. 

What about the church in terms of helping people in the church? So let me add another word in here. Let's put the word equipping in. I think equipping or training. That's a very very bad version of my diagram on here but if we break this down and we say well okay the personal walk of an elder what would you be looking for? What kind of a walk with God should an elder have? Let's just break this down. Say again. 

Prayerful okay. So obviously he's going to need to be spending time in prayer. How much time in prayer? Plenty and that's a very ambiguous answer. So my two minutes this morning was plenty was it? No. No I didn't only pray for two minutes this morning but I did pray for two minutes this morning and that's some longer time beyond that. 

But how much? What about how much time did Luther spend in prayer each day? Three hours. Okay so prayer I'm going to say pray like Luther. That's what people want us to do right? Pray like Luther. That's the first so that's the first three hours of every day just like Luther did. Plus of course then what about what about Robert Murray McShane or what about the what about the the long walk what about Jonathan Edwards and his long walks in the woods? So pray like Luther three hours a day plus extended times with God right? Alone with God for days at a time walking in the woods right? That's what you want from your godly pastor isn't it? Of course you do yeah everyone wants a Luther or a Jonathan Edwards or Robert Murray McShane. 

What about reading habits? Should pastors read? Okay so they should read what? They should read the Bible. Okay that would be good if your pastor read the Bible every day. Let's talk about personal this is the personal walk so Bible reading. How much time in the Bible each day? Say again. I mean let's be realistic how much how much is kind of like if your pastor spent five minutes in the Bible every day would that be okay? Would you be happy being led by a man who spent just five minutes in the Bible every day read three lines and you know read the Bible through every 17 years? You see you see you want him to spend some time in the Bible so let's put a figure on it. 

Someone give me a figure half an hour an hour any advances on an hour? What do you think? An hour one hour so one hour one hour I'm going to just I've written it down now it's just one hour. But what about what about studying for sermons? How long should that be done for? How much study should be put into how much does MacArthur do by the way? Anyone know? How many hours did he typically put into his sermons in a week? Let me tell you 35 okay so 35 hours in the in the that's what we were told at seminary. So okay 35 hours you want your pastor to preach like MacArthur right? So you're yeah so you're you're hoping for you're hoping for the guy to have actually really studied and be able to give you the accurate lowdown okay. What about evangelism? Should pastors evangelize? Okay so how should they be evangelizing? What do you think? Out on the street like Ray Comfort? Should we say should we say evangelize like Ray Comfort please? So on the street on the street preaching like Ray Comfort preferably with a YouTube ministry right? Because because you really want your pastor to have his own YouTube ministry don't you? That's I mean that's just like a normal expectation in the 21st century. So I guess you can see where I'm going with some of this can't you? Because this is already adding up. 

But let's move on to you've you've given some titles over here so counselling, hospitality, overseeing, equipping. I'm going to put here I'm going to lump these all together and just put the word shepherding down. Shepherding okay? So what are you expecting from your pastor in terms of shepherding? So you do you want to be able to send your pastor a text message and get a reply? Okay we'll put text messages down here shall we? So texts, what about emails? Should your pastor reply to emails? Okay yeah if you write him an email you want to reply don't you? Texts, emails, do you want your pastor to come and visit you? Who would like a visit from their pastor? When you're sick perhaps okay. Actually this is that's very unusual and very restrictive but visit when sick. At the minimum okay now that that's what I was expecting really so. 

So I'm going to put down here greater than or equal to visiting when sick. You definitely I mean if you're sick and in hospital you'd rather have a visit from your pastor wouldn't you? And well I mean you would like to have a visit from your pastor I'm sure at some point maybe some of you don't want your pastor to see your bedroom but or you know you wouldn't feel comfortable inviting your pastor into your home but most people kind of like the idea of pastoral visitation. What about Richard Baxter? Well he I told you about this last week if you were here he set up this system where he would go round and visit every member of his congregation and every member of the village in fact on a systematic basis every afternoon I think was given to visitation. So he would set up the mornings to be devoted to studying and then in the afternoons he would devote himself to visitation. And so I'm going to put down here it's kind of an ideal that a lot of people would have in here. 

I'm just going to say visit like Baxter. Can you any of you actually read my writing? This is an awkward board for me to write on for some reason. I don't know it looks better than the one last week but I'm struggling. So visit like Baxter. Okay what about the whole question of dealing with people's problems. 

Let's talk about shepherding. We are talking about shepherding aren't we? So people who are behaving badly in the church should the pastor fix that? Because everyone wants the pastor to fix that don't they? So they're going to say yes you should be dealing with those badly behaved people. What should we call that? Mediation. We should be dealing with all the difficult people who behave badly but not hurting anyone's feelings right? Apart from the really bad guys it's okay to hurt their feelings. Then you can get rid of them and they don't have to bother you again. 

Is that right? So mediation without hurting feelings of anybody because feelings are sacred and they mustn't ever be hurt. I'm talking about popular expectations here. What about then this pastor, this imaginary pastor that we're coming up with down here. What about the way he deals with the kind of issues in the church in terms of leadership and what should we call this? Oversight. Oversight leading. 

Really he should be able to do that in the background with very little effort shouldn't he? I mean nobody wants to see the inside of your engine running and people don't want to see the work that goes on behind the scenes in the church. That should be just taken care of away out there somewhere but it definitely mustn't. The pastor should be able to handle that very easily shouldn't he? Are you with me with this dream pastor? He should be able to handle that but it definitely shouldn't take up his time definitely not to the detriment of anything else. So we're going to put, I don't know where we're going to put it but we're going to put it down here. Leading without effort or time. 

Now you know this guy's imaginary don't you? Because this is just kind of ridiculous. Ideally of course he ought to be mentoring lots of people hadn't he at the same time and we could go on and say well what about the mentoring church? Has anyone read the mentoring church? What about that attitude where the pastor's kind of meeting with and discipling lots and lots of people? You'd want that wouldn't you? You'd want the key people in the church to be being discipled. So let's put down here mentoring. I'm using the common word and we'll put discipling underneath it. Discipling, mentoring, definitely he should be doing a lot of that. 

Obviously he ought to be able to run the different ministries in the church and oversee any staff in the church. Again without kind of dealing with anything that took up too much of his time. So kind of managing a church staff, well that ought to be easy right? Because he's a pastor and so he ought to be out the front pastoring and in our homes visiting and on our phones texting and emailing and phoning and that just ought to be automatic. Now I hope you don't mind me kind of playing this out painfully long form but we're not done. What about his family? We talked about his perfect personal walk with three hours prayer and hours Bible study, long walks in the woods with God, occasional days alone with God, fasting and praying and generally bringing down God's blessing for everyone else. 

We've talked about that but what about his family? Well his family ought to be under control right? I mean that's a biblical qualification for an elder so he ought to be, what about his relationship with his wife? I don't know where we're going to fit, oh it's family, it's over here. I think we're just going to have to turn the board over in a minute. So family, how much time should he spend with his wife each day? Should his wife see him or should he just see the church? How much time? I mean let's give the girl a break. How much are you going to give her? Time alone with hubby time. What do you think? Ten minutes? An hour? So we've got an hour, any advances on an hour? Three hours? We're going to do another one of these in a minute for expectations before and after marriage. 

That'll be next week. So let's just be a kind of medium shall we? We'll give her an hour, 60 minutes, sorry darling. She should be watching at home. She's going to be laughing all the way to the bathroom and then throw up. Just at the shock of the idea of having 60 minutes a day alone with her hubby. 

Okay what about children? I mean he's obviously, he's got to pour into his children right? Well actually we haven't finished with the wife. A date night? Does he get a date night? Does she get a date night? How many date nights? What did you say? Once a week from the unmarried. Any married people want to comment? Twice a week? Date nights? Donna's just died laughing. Okay I mean we're going to say, what's the minimum? Once a fortnight? What do you think? No hang on a minute, this is the ideal pastor isn't it? So one per week, date night we'll just put DN, date night, one a week. Now what about the children? So the children are young, does he put them to bed? Does he read stories to them? How long does he have to do that? Five minutes? Half an hour with the children? So children half an hour with each child? So let's give him half an hour a day with his children. 

Half an hour per day to what? To put them to bed? That's not much is it? How much should we give him? Two hours. This is the ideal pastor isn't it? Two hours a day with his children. Okay so he wakes up in the morning, he does three hours prayer, he does an hour's Bible study. He's going to have two hours with his children, an hour with his wife and then plus one night a week as a date night. How are we doing here? Oh yeah, 35 hours study. 

So what's four hours a day to do with his family? Four hours a day for the family. When is that going to happen? Which hours in the day? Morning and evening? So half an hour in the morning, three and a half hours in the evening. That doesn't work in this church does it? Because you all want to speak to your pastors in the evening don't you? So maybe an hour in the morning and then three hours in the evening. Well no that still doesn't work. When would you have your pastors see their families? That's a real question for this church actually so you can answer that later. 

But let's say four hours a day with the family. He's got to grow up his children in the fear and admonition of the Lord hasn't he? Otherwise he's disqualified as an elder and he has to step down. So he's got to be doing family Bible time. Is that included in the two hours per day or is that on top of it? It's included. Okay so that's just brought your figure down. 

So he's definitely doing at least half an hour. I mean I'm going to say an hour a day Bible study with his family right? Does he have to pray and read with his wife separately from the children? Or is it okay to just do it together as a family? Okay thanks. It's great that you told me. You know I really hope you don't mind me just playing this out but I want to play out the kind of somewhat ridiculous nature of our expectations versus reality. Because yes we do want a MacArthur who gets to study for 35 hours a week on a sermon and we really do want a pastor who's just immersed in prayer. 

I'm going to say those two are the non-negotiables but we also somehow have to fit in. This is a non-negotiable because if his family goes down he's disqualified as an elder right? So you can't let his family go down if he's not managing his own household well he can't be an elder. So what's, can he just ditch evangelism? No do the work of an evangelist. You can't just ditch evangelism. What about leading the church? Hang on a minute you want all the decisions in the church made right don't you? You don't want the decisions made wrong. 

But those decisions they only take seconds don't they? No they take a huge amount of effort and time to make decisions about what goes on in the church whether to remodel the basement or whether to wait, whether to how to fit the children's ministry together and all those different questions take huge amount of time. So you want him leading with effort and time. What about the shepherding, the overseeing, the counselling, the hospitality? How many hours a week should he be doing hospitality? How many people should he have around in his house? Well if he's not hospitable, if that's not his nature he's disqualified right? But what counts is how many hours is acceptable for hospitality? Are you going to throw stones at this man if he hasn't seen, if he hasn't had someone around in his house at least two hours a week? I mean two hours is not long is it for hospitality? It goes like that. Is it two hours a week minimum? We're going to add that in? Can you see where we've got problems? Okay this is, I'm only playing this out to try to say we do have problems. I'm going to now try and set out for you a systematic breakdown of what pastors should be doing according to the Bible and then we'll play that out for a bit. 

This is going to be interesting. Can I just flip this? Does this work? Am I going to break it? I am going to break it. I broke it! I didn't break the church though that's alright. Thank you. Okay. 

Does that still work? Can you still see this as the reflection okay for the video Raymond? Tell me if you can't read it and I'll readjust it but I think that's going to be easier for me. Okay. I'm going to be able to read my own writing here. This is when you know you're old, when you're kind of looking through the very bottom bit of your own glasses. Okay here we go. 

So I'm going to say, we'll start at the bottom here and we'll say job description. We're writing the job description for elders and we're going to say at the most fundamental level we're going to say Acts 6 for word and prayer. I know that's the wrong way around. Prayer and the ministry of the word. Don't let me. 

So P and W. Okay you with me there? P and W. Prayer and word. Praying and wording. Okay and then we're going to branch out over here and we'll say family. 

These are areas of non-negotiable responsibility and we're going to say personal walk. And you say well those things are kind of more to do with qualifications and I agree but for a pastor not to have that in his job description, okay I mean he's got to be able to do that sometime in the week and his hours are all over the place. This pastor, this elder that we're appointing has to be able to keep up his personal walk with God. He must keep up his family life otherwise we don't want him as an elder. Agreed? Okay so then here is the kind of central activity we're going to say prayer and the ministry of the word but coming out of that and I'd encourage you if you've got it on your app to look at the diagram that we did last week because coming out of that is what I consider to be actually the core text around which I'm going to hang everything now. 

So apart from these areas, personal walk and family life, I'm going to hang everything that an elder should be doing on the two-fold description that Jesus gave to Peter in John chapter 21. So in John chapter 21, let's put that here, John 21 and we'll say verses 15 to 17. You remember from last week Jesus said to Peter, uh, feed my sheep, tend my lambs, uh hang on, feed my lambs, tend my sheep, feed my sheep, right? That's what he said. What do we call that activity? We call it the activity of shepherding. In fact the name pastor and if you remember back to the series about elders, elders are pastors. 

There's no way around it. The name pastor means shepherd. So we'll put here shepherding and we'll say shepherding is the central activity which actually I believe encompasses all the other activities that a pastor, an elder should be doing according to the Bible. I'll break it down for you. You can see whether you agree with me. 

I'll show you if I get time how I've taken all of these from the, from the other one. By the way if you're trying to copy this don't bother because I'm going to give you a nice pretty colourful one as a document at the end. I just want to take you through this to give us time to think through it. Um, so obviously there have to be sheep, um, to shepherd. So you could put a category here finding sheep and under finding sheep we're going to talk about evangelism, okay. 

And you know evangelism but more than evangelism evaluating people guarding the, guarding the flock against people that come, evaluating people is this a wolf, is this a lamb, is this a sheep. So pastors need to be involved in kind of meeting and getting to know people who come into the church because they have to say well is this person joining the church, is this person not saved, is this person saved. It's going to be a job for a shepherd. So we'll put here finding the sheep and um, here we'll put evangelism. I'm going to abbreviate evangelism and we'll put evangelizing, sorry. 

Let's keep our participles going. Evanguing, that's evangelizing and we'll put here evaluating, um, and I'm going to put here guarding, evaluating, guarding. And so evangelizing is fulfilling the great commission. We're going and we are teaching and then we're baptizing. We're obviously doing the work of an evangelist. 

Remember that scripture? I won't write them all down. Evaluating or guarding, so let's just kind of put in here baptizing. You could put discipling under evangelism in that sense of making disciples. Evaluating or guarding, you've obviously got the business here of meeting, um, meeting sheep who come and taking time to spend with people who visit the church and are wanting to join the church because well you get to know people. How can you know whether there's a wolf joining the church or a sheep joining the church? So um, under here you might put things like membership meetings. 

Um, you might put hospitality meetings. So welcoming, having people, the strangers, we're supposed to show hospitality to strangers. You might invite people around to your home, get to know them, that kind of thing. So there's, there's a lot that could take place over here and we're just under the whole question of finding sheep to shepherd. Um, but the two fundamental activities that Jesus spoke to Peter about are feeding, feed my sheep and tend my sheep. 

So feeding and tending are these, are the two basic activities. Um, we're going to branch out from there and talk about everything that pastors, elders should be doing under feeding and tending. I'm going to show you that actually you can kind of categorize everything pretty much under those two categories. But I've added a third just for the sake of clarity, not because it doesn't fit under feeding and tending, but I think it helps to show another major area of effort that we're engaged in. And that's the idea of strengthening. 

And what do I mean by that? Um, I mean, uh, we're talking about a flock here. We're talking about a congregation. So we're talking about obviously finding sheep, that's evangelizing, that's bringing people in, welcoming new members and so on. We've got feeding the sheep, that's all the teaching and counseling and ministry preaching and so on. Tending the sheep is all the kind of looking after people that has to be done. 

But now I'm saying there's another area which we identified last week under the biblical activities, which is in Ephesians 4, and that's equipping. And within that equipping area, there's, I suppose you could say a subdivision of the whole business of equipping the church is, um, I called it entrusting because to Timothy 2, Paul told Timothy, the things which you've heard from me entrust to faithful men who will be able to teach others likewise. So this area here that I've called strengthening, um, I'm going to put down here equipping, um, and we'll, we'll play that out, but also entrusting. So entrusting, equipping, feeding, tending, you could put these under the general category of feeding and tending as well, but I'm just separating them off to highlight the difference for you. Okay. 

So this gives us a kind of fairly balanced view of what elders should be doing. According to this, they should be devoting themselves to prayer and the ministry of the word. Once that's said, everything else has to be characterized by prayer. So we can't get rid of our devotion to prayer. If we do, we do it at our peril, but at the same time, an elder must take care of his family and he must maintain his personal walk. 

We're going to say he's going to have to have his own personal walk with the Lord in the Bible every day. He's going to have to have a family time where he's engaging with his family and leading them and nurturing them, but the rest of his efforts are all to do with shepherding the flock. We can fit everything that we talked about last week under that general title. So finding, we've talked about evaluating, guarding, we talked about evangelizing. I really wish I'd written it out long-hand now. 

Let's talk about feeding. Now it's hot and it's late. Is this interesting to you? Okay. Good. I'm hoping it is because I'm just going to carry on. 

I want to talk to you rather than the wall. So if you're struggling, grab a drink, do jumping jacks or. . . Okay. 

Let's talk about feeding. What activities does a pastor do that are feeding activities? Come on, let's get some participants going. Quick as a flash. Say again? Teaching. Okay. 

Let's put this down. So teaching. What did Paul tell Timothy to devote himself to? Reading, reading of scripture. So public reading of scripture, teaching of scripture, preaching. There's preaching. 

I'm going to add in here that the other one, exhorting. Where am I going to put it? I need smaller writing. Let me shift these over. Let's try that one again. So reading, reading, teaching, preaching and exhorting. 

Okay. Those are all scriptures. These are all scriptural activities that we identified last week. I'll point you back to that diagram. You can look at it, in fact, whilst we're doing that. 

Now let's just. . . So let's link all these together. All of these are coming from the concept of feeding. 

What about tending? What kind of activities happen under the heading of tending? Okay. I'm going to add one here for you whilst you're thinking about it. Overseeing, overseeing. I'm going to put here individual sheep. Then you'll understand that I'm going to put here overseeing the flock. 

That's more like the whole congregation. These are individuals or couples or small groups or whatever. I've put in here the title overseeing because that's a biblical activity that Paul told the Ephesian elders, God had made them overseers of the flock and that he'd purchased with his own blood. Peter called the elders overseers. So there's no way around it. 

This business of overseeing, that's the word that we get bishop from originally, is an activity that elders are supposed to be doing. What does it mean even? This is the looking over, but it can also include the idea of ruling over or leading because obviously if you're watching over what's going on, you become involved in the direction of things. So there are some things that come out of this. Let's put leading as an activity which is really overseeing the whole flock. Then here there's ruling. 

Now we're really clocking up. Let's put in here, example. You have to be examples as an elder. Then we've got this really boring one that everyone wants to ignore, administrating. I'm going to put that in as a modern word because that is included in the concept of leading. 

You cannot lead without engaging in administrating. It's just part of leadership, but it's often ignored by people who don't realize that their pastors actually have to spend time doing that. What about leading things like evangelism or missionary activity? Let's just put here missions to give you an idea of some of the activities that pastors may actually have to get involved in leading. Now what about the activities involved in overseeing individual sheep? Someone mentioned one earlier. I'm going to break them down into three categories. 

Correcting here and then directing, directing and encouraging. Does all sheep like to be corrected, directed and encouraged, don't you? You'd like that from your pastor, I'm sure. Under correcting, we've got all those biblical categories we talked about last week. Admonition, admonishing. We've got reproving and rebuking. 

Remember this? This tends to happen individually, doesn't it? You're overseeing individual sheep and you end up correcting them, admonishing them, reproving them, rebuking them. Counselling, I'm going to put here, it's not a biblical term. It just helps you to understand that counselling really actually embraces all of this. It may include directing. A lot of our council, because you guys are young, involves counselling people about life decisions. 

I never dreamt that I would be counselling so many people about relationships. Relationship questions, should I, shouldn't I? Things like that, should I take this job? What should I do in my career? I never dreamt that I'd be doing that much counselling. But it's actually basically a question of directing the sheep. Sheep want to know where to go and so we call that directing. A lot of that has to do with life events as well. 

Life events, counselling, weddings, to do with funerals, to do with illness, to do with changes in life, all sorts goes on at that point. Now encouraging, where do we get to? Here's encouraging. Well there's a lot of time spent by your pastors comforting. Why are my writings getting worse? Comforting. Okay. 

What about exhorting? Here it is. Here's our biblical word. Exhorting. Individuals saying to people, you know, I want to speak to you to encourage you to do what's right. Come on, you know it, now do it. 

That's exhorting someone to carry on. That's a whole ministry in itself, isn't it? Now we haven't talked a great deal about equipping and we've definitely not played out the whole feeding thing, but are you beginning to get the picture? Let's play out the feeding side of things a little bit more. We'll come back to the equipping and entrusting bit in a moment. But feeding by reading. Have you taken on board the reality that Paul told Timothy, until I come, devote yourself to the public reading of scripture? So he was supposed to be reading to people. 

Why? Well, people need food and people don't read. Okay. So everyone can read today. Yeah, but they don't all read today, do they? So actually, even though you can read, you don't always read. And so it's one of the reasons why the other year when I was cut off from the congregation during the pandemic, panickedemic conditions that we were dealing with, during that strange time, I just thought, I've got to be reading the Bible to my flock. 

And so I thought, well, I've got to be doing my family Bible time. What about if we recorded our family Bible time, stuck it up on YouTube, maybe people would follow along with us. Let's do a reading plan. Let's read the Bible chronologically. Okay, let's do it. 

So we started two years later, we're still going. Now we're doing it not chronologically, but we're going through the Robert Murray McShane reading plan. If you don't know about it, check out the YouTube channel. You could join us in our kitchen every day as we read the Bible. What's the advantage of that? You get to teach, you get to be taught the Bible every single day. 

I get to teach through the whole Bible. It's nothing so exciting as that. Today I was teaching Romans 8. So tomorrow, when you wake up at four o'clock in the morning and you don't know what to do, you'll find today's video on YouTube, you can just tune in and you'll think I'm up at four o'clock in the morning with my family. I may be up, but my family are not at that time. 

And there's the recording for you tomorrow morning of Romans 8. And you can just do that all the way through the Bible with us. What's the advantage for us as elders? I get to feed the flock. That's what I'm supposed to be doing. It's what we're all doing. 

Adam's doing it in different ways. Michael's doing it in different ways. But we're all just busy trying to feed food to you. Now you can follow your own Bible reading plan. You don't all have to follow this one, but you've got to read the Bible. 

Dummy. It's like food. You've got to eat. You can't thrive if you don't eat. It's our job as shepherds to lead you to food. 

So that's just one way we're doing it. Reading, teaching, teaching the Bible, obviously. But that's a big deal, isn't it? How much preparation should go into teaching? Well, I mean, this is teaching, isn't it? This is a Bible study. How much preparation do you think went into this? Go on. You can have a guess. 

I don't even know. I haven't added it up. I could tell you over the last couple of weeks, more than 20 hours. Today I could tell you today how many hours I've put in. If I open it up. 

Wednesday. Here we go. So I didn't actually begin preparing today until 2. 30. 2. 

1.  Sorry, 2. 35. So 3. 34, 5. 

2.  Five and a half hours today. But there's a whole lot of time gone in beforehand for me to be able to teach you this. And I've been working on this series of sermons for how long, Adam? It's been like six, eight weeks, something like that, in the back when we decided and I began, I mapped this out originally back then. Little by little by little, working away, working away, working away. 

Why? Because you can't just teach this stuff unless you understand it. And there's all sorts of books being written about shepherding. I needed to break it down and I thought, I'm going to go back and just study what the Bible says and I want to pull out from the Bible. I want to do it inductively and just get what the Bible says about it and break it down and actually show you that that's what we're doing. And that's taken me forever to prepare for that. 

And that's not to boast about it. It's just because I'm thick. I can't just pick up someone else's work and do it and teach it. But teaching, that takes a lot of effort. Now, I'm speaking extemporaneously. 

I've got small notes. But I can only do that because I've spent a long time preparing to teach. On Sunday, you'll see I've got somewhere between 20 and 30 pages of notes and I've carefully worked through everything. So I try not to say a wrong word. I don't read it all, but I'm preaching it. 

But I'm trying to be very thoroughly prepared. I'm still changing it at the last minute and still finishing it at the last minute usually. But for preaching, I put in a lot more time to prepare that sermon for Sunday. But into teaching goes a lot of, you would say, background study. You can't teach an issue until you've studied it. 

But then there's actually preparing the lectures, if you're going to call it a lecture, a lesson. There's that side of it as well. For preaching, obviously, in terms of time spent teaching, this is the small part. But there's also the actual teaching itself. So let's just put here, let's call it class, shall we? Class or Bible study time. 

Then there's preaching. There's obviously all the sermon prep time, which you know is at least 35 hours a week, isn't it? So actually, let me just clarify that one. It isn't always, because it can't always be. But actually, it is kind of a cliche amongst preachers. MacArthur got 35 hours in the study to prepare. 

If you knew MacArthur, and I don't know him like my best friend, don't even know him like a buddy, but I know him as a teacher, and I've been in close contact with him during staff meetings, whilst I was on staff at Grace, you get to see a man who is gifted up here. I mean, the guy is sharp beyond where I can ever hope to be. And that's not to elevate him, it's just to say the reality. I went to school with some individuals like that. I remember being in class with people and studying physics and chemistry and things like that. 

And there was that one guy, that one guy who could just, he just soaked it up. He just, he read it, he understood it, he knew it. I read it, I struggled with it, I finally understood it, and then I forgot it. It was just, it was just, you know, that's been the story of my life. I had to work really hard for the exams, and I got good marks, and I stayed in that top 10% in my classes and graduated well and did well. 

But I was never on that level, and I never will be. I can't be what I am not. But there are people who are. And they come to prepare a sermon, they put 35 hours into it, or 20 hours into it, or whatever they do, and out comes a MacArthur sermon. Let me just let you into a secret. 

For us to preach at anything approaching that level, I heard from a friend, I won't name him the other week, but an American who visited this church some months ago, and now it's got you guessing, but you won't be able to identify him from that because we have a lot of Americans passing through. But I heard about him from another friend the other week, that this guy has to have at least a minimum of 40 hours to preach ever. Any sermon that he prepares has to be 40 hours of preparation time. Well, that's a lot of time. We're just talking about preaching. 

And so for us to come up with stuff which is at a high level and to feed you the way we want to be out of feed you, you'd all love to have MacArthur or one of those great preachers preaching for you, but you've got us instead. But for us to do the best we can do takes even more effort, right Adam? Or we have to give you the best we can do, and you have to put up with that. One of those two, and sometimes both. So sermon prep, that's a big deal in what elders need to be spending time doing. Then there's the delivery. 

Let me just tell you, just so you know and can feel suitably sorry for me on Sundays, and Adam and anyone else that preaches, preaching twice, when you pour out your heart into your sermon, preaching twice, it finishes you. It finishes you. And that's not just me speaking, but people like Spurgeon would say to preach for an hour is like 12 hours hard labour. You'd say, oh that was Spurgeon. Yeah it's even harder for us guys, come on, the guy was super gifted. 

You see, super gifted footballers, they can just do it, right? And then there are the people who have to work really hard and might just get there. Well that's us, feel sorry for us. No, pray for us, because the blessing comes from the Holy Spirit, right? But preaching, it is a huge, huge effort. And I'm going to say 12 hours of hard labour for one sermon, and then you preach two of them in a row, and the second one's harder. If you come to the second service, you get the poor deal in this church from me, because I'm just like, I've spent, I'm trying hard, it's tough. 

So there's the preaching part. But there's also the praying part. Do you want your pastors to come just having spent time in preparation, doing the academic work, but not actually pouring themselves out in prayer for you, in prayer for the subject, in prayer over understanding. It has to just, the whole thing has to be prayer and the ministry of the Word. So hopefully when we come to preach, we are coming prayed up. 

And that's just not just having said a prayer, that's having met with God during the week in appealing for His help. That's what you want anyway. Okay, so there's another element to preaching which is just kind of like the background study. You actually, in order to be able to preach, you cannot, if you're doing what we do and preaching expository sermons, you cannot just be studying your passage of scripture, and that's it. You've got to be reading other books, you've got to be reading other bits of the Bible, you've got to be feeding your soul because I'm just saying that there's a background study. 

Very often, my most rapidly read books are read when I'm preaching a sermon and it's like, someone's written a book on this verse of the Bible. You know, it's like, now what? Okay, buy it, kindle quick. Okay, I've got to read this before because I've got to preach this on Saturday. This guy's written a whole book about it. What if I'm wrong in my understanding? You read the whole book and you're like, oh, it was right. 

Or you read the whole book and you're like, I've got to rewrite my sermon because this guy's proved something amazing about the text, which I hadn't really noticed. Sometimes dictionary entries on one word can be like that. You just start studying one word in the original language and you've got like, you know, 50 pages of detailed dictionary entries to try to digest because there's a huge controversy about the right translation of this word and your whole sermon hinges on it. So you say, I've got, you know, I've set aside 35 hours this week to prepare and then come Friday, you're like, I need another 20 hours. So, is this right, Adam? Does this happen to you as well? Right, give me some help from the back here. 

Yeah, okay, it does happen to Adam too because I mean, it seems to happen to me painfully frequently as I discover things late. Okay, so there's background study going on. All right, that's just kind of on the feeding side of things in terms of preaching and there's exhorting. Have you noticed we've introduced something extra to the services here? That's because we just realised, you know, we need to be able to exhort you as a congregation. We're commanded to and that needs to be part of the preaching, yes, but you've got more than one pastor. 

It would be really good if we had one of the pastors read and lead in prayer but also give a little pastoral exhortation. It gives another focus every week. So, we say we're going to have one of the pastors exhort the congregation. It's not big teaching moment. It's just a straightforward like here's what it says now, come on guys, this is what we need to believe and this is what we need to focus on. 

All right, let's pray about it. That's actually being pastored. It's being shepherded. Have I gone too long? Okay. Okay, over here let's just move to equipping. 

I think we've done tending. Let's just deal with equipping. Obviously, there is a pulpit equipping ministry which takes place every week. Ephesians 4, 11 to 16, evangelists and pastor teachers are supposed to be equipping the saints for the equipping of the saints for the work of ministry, right? So, our job as teachers, pastor teachers is to give you the equipment that you need so that you can do the work that God has given you to do. Obviously, that's a general teaching issue but also there's going to be very practical stuff like, okay, how do you evangelize? How do you share the gospel with someone? What about how to study the Bible? What about understanding proper biblical hermeneutics and things like that? Well, that's stuff that should take place little by little drip, drip, drip from the pulpit. 

There ought to be an equipping ministry going on so that you are equipped to do works of ministry. But then there's what you could say is more devoted equipping. We are really developing, I'm very excited to have more space in the basement now, beginning next week, God willing. The equipping hour, so typically churches do this, some kind of an adult Sunday school. So, let's call this the equipping hour. 

That's one way of doing ministry. You've got to know that Pastor Mike has been spending not just one hour but I would say a few hundred hours over the last year or so planning and scheming and preparing and developing a whole plan to get this equipping hour up and running. And that's under Adam's direction who's kind of steering the ship in that direction and Mike's developing this hour. We're not going to call it the hour of power anymore, are we Adam? Is that gone as a title? I thought more of you would find that funny. You're falling asleep, aren't you? There's a training element here. 

So, let's just put in here training. And under training you've got, well in our church you've got hominaya, which you all know about and hopefully have signed up for. And then you've also got something we call School for Heralds. School for Heralds is a little preacher's group that we have where we'll take individual men who have a desire to preach or believe that they may have a gift and we'll give them opportunity but we'll also give them instruction and we'll give them feedback and we'll say, don't give up your day job, you know, or have you thought about road sweeping or whatever. People will say, hey, you know, God has given you a gift there, you should be taking that seriously and we'll be watching their life but giving them opportunity, giving them instruction. 

With that we send some of these guys out to other churches to go and preach an occasional sermon but we're kind of looking at them and thinking, well here's a potential future preacher perhaps, we're not jumping at it. But we're taking very seriously this because coming back to this issue of shepherding, here what are we saying we're doing here? We're saying we're strengthening the flock. So the flock needs, according to Ephesians 4, 11 to 16, the flock needs to grow in maturity, right, so you're not blown this way and that by every wind of doctrine but the flock also needs to be equipped for works of ministry. So you guys are supposed to be doing ministry. Now within that equipping process what are you doing? You're strengthening the flock, aren't you, because you're multiplying ministers. 

So we see that as a very sacred task that we have to help you to be able to do the work that God has for you to do and then you've got to go do it and then we're all built up in love, Ephesians 4, 16. Brilliant. Part of that then is the reality that Paul gave to Timothy, to Timothy 2, 2, the things that you've heard from me and trust of faithful men who will be able to teach others also and I almost called this replacing instead of strengthening because there's this sense in which we're supposed to be passing on, we're supposed to be equipping people but then entrusting the things that we've learned as elders to faithful men who will then be able to teach others also and basically you're in the business of replacing yourself. So that one day, I worked it out the other day when I'm going to die unless something intervenes in the meantime, maybe I'll die sooner but I had a look at the calendar and thought by this point I'm going to be dead or useless, one of the two but by that point and it says really not that much time left. I've got to get busy. 

I've got to get busy in trusting the things that God has given me to faithful men who will be able to teach others also. Why? Because the flock needs shepherds, right? Because more flocks need shepherds. We've got to go planting churches. I didn't even talk about that under the leading part. I've missed out on the whole section. 

That's what I've done. Yeah. Anyway, so you've got Hermonea, a lot of activity goes on in Hermonea. How much time should we put into training people in the Bible? Is it a part-time activity? What about giving opportunity to men who may have gifts to evaluate it and spending time with them to help them prepare a sermon? Should we be doing that? What about training individuals who show promise and spending time with them in a mentoring relationship where you are actually discipling a future generation of potential leaders? That is something we are absolutely committed to. In terms of priorities and in terms of where we spend our time, which bit should we not do? That's the question. 

The answer is we've got to do all this, right? When you get your little pretty diagram that I spent so long trying to produce, not producing the diagram was easy, but organising my thoughts was incredibly hard. When you get that, you got to say, look at all of this and say, okay, how many hours was it on, what did she give me for a date night? An hour a week or two hours? How much does my wife get? How much does the children get? We cannot give up essential things, personal work with God, family. How much time does it all take? Can you see why if we're going to be faithful to actually do all of this? This is the kind of stuff, all of it, that I feel I must do. I feel this burden, I was like, I have to do that. Why? Because God wants his shepherds to do all of this. 

I don't feel like any of this is optional. Do you know what, I'll give you an example. Today, I used to track my time every day. I don't anymore because it was too painful. Today, I woke at 3. 

45. At 4. 14, I had a cup of tea and began my personal Bible study. 5. 30, I had a cup of tea again and answered an urgent email. 

That urgent email took three and a quarter hours to answer. Several drafts. I believed it was urgent. I hope it was. I then went to pray and walk the dog and pray. 

That was 8. 45. 9. 45, I was back and we did family Bible time. 10. 

35, I had to do some admin and 10. 40, I had breakfast. That's when our neighbours probably looked in the window saw me having breakfast at 10. 40 and thought, see, pastor's life. 10. 

50, that was a 10 minute breakfast. I changed and dressed for travel. 11 o'clock, I left to come to church and spent the journey making phone calls to do with a counselling issue. 12. 15, I arrived at the chapel and I was in a phone call about a counselling issue until 11. 

11. 11. 11, I started catching up with the staff here. 128, I had a pastoral catch up on counselling situations and about hermenea planning discussion with Adam. 220, I walked to the shop to get lunch. 

235, I began my Bible study prep. 355, I had coffee. And 4. 00, I got back to Bible study prep and I was doing that until we started this. So that's today. 

I don't know what time we'll finish. But you want to finish now? It just varies. It really varies. So last night, I think we went to bed about 11, something like that. But I'm not saying this is every day. 

Praise God. I do sometimes not have to. . . I'm generally at the moment, I'm awake at three or four o'clock in the morning for whatever reason. 

Sometimes I can get back to sleep. Sometimes like today, I can't, but I have to get up and just get on with work or Bible study or whatever it is. I'm just going to say that's not an untypical day. I guess what's untypical, that would be a very typical Sunday for me, sort of up at three or four o'clock in the morning. Please do understand. 

I hesitated to tell you that, but please do understand. I'm not saying that to boast. All the different pastors work at different sleep requirements. I need more, but I don't get easily end of the spectrum. And that's just to do with my body rather than if I could sleep more, I think I would sleep more because I could do with it. 

But all of the pastors at work like crazy to try to do all of this, but we can't do all of it. So, okay, what we've been doing for the last year with one of our offsite elders, Dan helping us and Michael helping us to implement it is we've been trying to divide our areas of responsibility more to say, okay, we'll focus, Adam, you focus more on equipping side of things. You're the pastor over equipping. He's directing hominaya. I don't think about directing hominaya. 

We had a talk today about how many students have signed up. I've had nothing to do with all the hundreds of hours of background administration and directorship and contacts with other schools and accreditation questions and things like that to do with hominaya even that go on behind the scenes over here. I just couldn't cope with it. I have a varying counselling load that sometimes is intense and demanding like today and recent weeks and other times it would be Adam who's under a pile or Mike that's under a pile or Ross that's under a pile of different counselling questions. When somebody's marriage is breaking down, do you want your pastor to say, you know, I can see you in 10 weeks time when I get through my pile of emails that I've got to answer. 

But what you do find is that there are a tonne of things that crowd in like emails. So I've spent three hours this morning answering one really urgent email that came in overnight but had to be answered, I believed, before the Lord. And that means that I still haven't got to the backlog of emails that are in my inbox from visiting pastors that wanted a response about something and or the pastor of the church in Jerusalem that I've said I'm going to call in and visit when we're there or, you know, things like that just get pushed back. And you say, Tommy, you're just trying to make us feel sorry for you. No, I really am not. 

I do believe this is the best job in the world and I would pay to do it. I would literally pay money to have you let me do this for the rest of my life. Because it's the work of God. There's nothing more thrilling, nothing more wonderful, nothing more amazing than to give someone a bit of help and watch the Lord change their life around. There's nothing more thrilling than to stand up here and preach the word of eternal life or to preach a message like Sunday from Psalm 62 and to have people come up afterwards and say, that was for me. 

That really helped me. That's just the most amazing, thrilling, wonderful privilege in the whole wide world. I'm just going to say, guys, we need more elders. Do you get it? Do you get why? We're a church with four pastors, one of them's very much part time and very much down with ill health a lot of the time, our dear brother Ross. But I'm telling you, he prays like a full-time pastor. 

I reckon he prays more than any of us personally. It's just my own opinion. The guy is so prayerful and he's awake in the night praying for you, praying for me. I value his prayers and his presence and his counsel in this church more than I could ever say. But the guys, we're all flat out. 

We're all struggling with, I've got to be faithful to my work with the Lord. I've got to be faithful to my family. I've got all these other things that are going on. I can't let that drop. I can't let that drop. 

I must do it. But this is non-negotiable. That's where we live, right Adam? Any little thing that comes in extra, we're just like, I don't know what to do. I'm sorry. Really, really sorry, but I have to focus on this. 

Guys, we need to pray because the Lord Jesus said, pray to the Lord of the harvest that he would thrust out laborers into his vineyard. He said, for the harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few. It is hard, hard work. It is wonderful work. God is the one who has to raise up laborers. 

We need shepherds. So would you pray? Would you pray for this whole process? I've tried to set it out for you. I'll give you the diagram. You can study it out for yourself with color and more detail on my picture there. I've tried to give it to you as we've tried to derive it from the Bible because we want to be biblical. 

As you think about when we finally do send out the request for you to nominate people to be considered as candidates for eldership, we want you to be praying. I want you to take this and take the qualifications for elders. You need to sit with it before God and pray that the Lord would help you and pray. As you think about nominating people, pray that the Lord would help you to see the people whom he has gifted and enabled to do this because he's the one who has to raise up people. We're going to look to you for nominations. 

We'll consider the nominations. We'll work then with a group of men and we're going to put a group of men into elder candidacy. After we've considered the nominations, we'll appoint men to be candidates and then we'll work with them for two or three years to train them and also to evaluate them to see whether they are truly qualified to be elders. We take this very, very seriously. We're not going to hurry it, but we want you to take it seriously as well and to take it prayerfully. 

Would you do that? All right. We are done for now. It's over to you for some questions. It's 9. 35. 

I'm going to say probably like last week, we'll go till 10 with questions. That gives us a few minutes. Your questions in the room. Always good to take questions in the room first and then we're going to trust Raymond to feed us questions from YouTube. You feed them to Adam, not to me. 

Adam can filter out the best ones and most helpful ones and then we can try at least to answer your questions. Maybe I answered everything. Questions in the room? Anyone? There is a microphone coming to you. Have I ever been close to burnout? Yes. Very. 

I think. Last year I had a month off. It was horrible. Was it a month? Two months. I can't remember. 

Anyway, I was signed off work. I don't know what it was, but I ended up with high blood pressure, which is not normal for me and felt just really horrible. I don't know if I got an infection. I then got COVID whilst I was sick with that and felt better from whatever was bugging me whilst I had COVID and could still feel myself recovering from that whatever it was. But that whatever it was was never diagnosed, thankfully. 

I don't know if that was close to burnout. I think we've all felt pretty close to burnout, haven't we? I've watched us as pastors go through that cycle. We haven't burnt out Michael yet. He seems to be young and fresh. What was it you said when he came? Fresh meat or something like that. 

But yeah, it is a problem, a real problem. I'm probably going to be shocked for saying this, but I'm with Spurgeon who said it's better to burn out than to rust out. And I would rather burn out and die young doing the Lord's work than spend years trying to protect myself to have some kind of long, lengthy retirement, only to kind of have the Lord come in a year or two and realise that I've kind of postponed really laboring for Him. That's kind of my mental attitude. But then what actually happens in reality is there's just so much to be done. 

And it's people and it's God's work and you just have to get on with it. But we are working on a better balance, aren't we? Dan is helping us. Mike's helping us. Mike's actually going to. . 

. He's promised for the last year that he's going to force Adam to take a holiday. Are you actually going to have one? It could happen. So Mike's just. . 

. I think Mike told Adam that if he doesn't take a holiday, he's going to just cut his pay. So Mike's kind of bringing a bit of organisation at that level that we've never had before. But we've been church planting. It's been an incredible ride for 11 years and now we're realising that we can't keep the pace up like this and infinite. 

We need more elders, but we don't want to short circuit the route to elders. We don't want to say we'll give you half elders. We want to give you full elders. So we'll work at it and wait and trust that the Lord will keep us all going in the meantime. Adam's got a question and then there's another question at the back. 

So someone asked, what are the expectations for elders who have full time jobs? Will they be expected to everything on the board on a smaller scale or just focus on an aspect of the elder role? I think the expectations go up, don't they? Isn't that what we agreed? They actually have to do more. I can't remember. No, an elder is an elder. So an elder is, there's no distinction in the Bible between an elder who works a secular job as well. Paul was making tents at one point and providing for his own needs. 

And at another point he's receiving missionary support and he's fully supported and he focuses on the word, the ministry of the word when he can. On paper though, and according to the Bible, there's no distinction between in terms of authority or responsibility between full time elders and part time elders. We're all equally responsible. We still have to give an account before God. But obviously God knows if you've got a job to do. 

So if God knows you've got a job to do, he's not going to expect you to do everything that you would be expected to do if you were working full time. Pretty simple. How elders divide up those responsibilities that you see there amongst yourselves is, I just believe that is open to, there's no prescription in the Bible. There's no Bible verse that I can point to that says this is how to divide up responsibilities. But you do get pictures of division of labors and it seems to go along the line of giftedness. 

Paul was considered the chief speaker. But Barnabas was with him as his right hand man wherever he went. And then there was Luke and others who were with him. But Paul seemed to be the chief speaker a lot of the time. Does that mean you have to have one guy that does all the speaking? I don't believe so. 

But if there is a division of labors, I mean it's been beautifully illustrated in the last year having Mike here and having Mike focus on getting the administration of the church in order and Mike's giftedness on that level is up here. Whereas Adam's is probably here and mine is down here somewhere. And Adam was kind of feeling the pain greatly carrying the slack that I left. And then Mike's come in and he's cleaned house. In a year things are just getting organised that have never been organised in ways that they've never been organised. 

It's just like, wow, he can do that. This is great. That's a leadership gift on the level of administration. It's just genius. Praise the Lord for it. 

But Mike's, you've heard him. Mike's a gifted preacher as well. Adam's a gifted preacher. Ross is a gifted preacher. If only you could pray for his health. 

My personal belief is that when you've got gifting, you should use that gift, that the church needs to be benefited by the gift. But I don't believe every person with a gift has to do everything that they could do. I'm kind of a jack of all trades kind of guy. So maybe not administration, although maybe if you said you're going to pull out all of my teeth and my toenails and fingernails, I would do some more administration. But that's not my giftedness at all. 

But I'll do it if I have to. I was a church planter. I had to do administration. Poor Ross had to suffer with it because there wasn't anyone else to do it. I was the finance guy and there is no one worse to have as a finance guy than me. 

But I was that guy because you have to do it. So with a division of labors, I think a lot of people inevitably can end up with more elders. You could end up with a situation where more people are more capable of operating more exclusively in the area of their giftedness. That to me is a great strength. That was one of the arguments I gave last week for Big Church. 

I just think that's a huge blessing. If you have more elders, you're more capable of saying amongst the elders, okay, who's really gifted at counselling? All right, let's have them do most of the counselling. Every other pastor who's not so gifted in counselling goes, whew. And that guy is just like, I love this. I could just do this all day. 

And who's really gifted in administration? Okay, let's give them free rein with the admin and so on. That's a blessing, isn't it? You want that because none of us are like supermen. None of us can do everything brilliantly. There are people like that, but they are just incredibly rare. So answer that question. 

Yes. Oh, next to Steve. Can you please remind me of your name and forgive me at the same time? Maria. I was going to ask if there is any soft skills or standard in the sense of, I don't know, personality traits, habits, kind of like the daily life of a person that we are considering for eldership that accompanies or supports that layout that you gave to us. And within that, I would include, I don't know if education of any sort or yeah, like more general things that we can think of that would support that. 

Yes, I think there are some classic mistakes to avoid on that front. So for instance, guy likes to speak, likes to be in the limelight, puts himself forwards because he's kind of like that type A personality with a extrovert nature who just likes to be talking. Doesn't matter what he says, just wants to talk. Do not make that man a little bit of a bad guy. The guy's a businessman. 

He can make things work and he can shape up an organisation, but he lacks the qualities, the qualifications of, do not make that man an elder. He may be ideally suited to make the share price go up in a Fortune 500 company, but he is possibly the death of your church unless he happens to be an incredibly rare godly person. Now I happen to know and be very good friends with some people who were exactly that. Godly, godly people, chairman of the local bank, CEO and founder of absolutely fantastically successful company and an elder on staff as a lay elder at Grace Community Church. He's going to come and preach in this church soon in October. 

He'll visit, it's been before. But there are people like that who are just incredible, but you'll meet them and you'll have no idea because they're the most humble, godly people you could ever meet and you'll be like, what's your other? The chairman of the local bank, he's not anymore, he was. You've got all these millions of pounds or whatever and you just have zero idea because they're so humble and godly and what drives them is Christ. That's the rare exception, isn't it? So there are some big mistakes to make in terms of. . 

. I am the world's number one anti-fan of personality tests. I think it's akin to racism, but that's just a side issue. I do not find anything like it in the Bible. When Paul writes to Timothy, when Paul writes to Titus about qualifications for elders, he says nothing about all of that at all. 

You will not find it. The only thing that's in there is apt to teach, apt to teach. It doesn't say whether his teaching style is dynamic, whether he's the super engaging guy. He doesn't say what even Spurgeon said, that you have to have a good voice. Paul never mentions the man's ability to speak in public. 

The only qualification is apt to teach. That's it. So we can add a whole load of stuff to the Bible, I think, at our peril. If God has gifted and God has called and God has qualified someone, we want that man and we want him, even if he's an introvert who has to overcome all of those inhibitions to be able to serve God. Let me tell you a story. 

I was saved, my wife was saved under the ministry of a man who when he was a teenager, if you spoke to him, he would blush red and completely freeze and be unable to speak. He was that shy. He was absolutely terrified shy. He became a salesman for pacemakers and worked in London and around the world for a company selling pacemakers to cardiac surgeons. Did really well. 

He was a deacon at the Metropolitan Tabernacle here in London. God, God called him. God equipped him. He had fire in his bones that he couldn't put out. He had to preach. 

When he preached, he was shaking in his boots. He was literally terrified to death. But I've never heard preaching like it. Man was called by God and he could preach the gospel like nobody else. I've ever heard apart from dead people. 

Lloyd Jones is one of them. He was saved under Lloyd Jones' ministry. There were many copies of Lloyd Jones out there, but very few people that could actually do it. He was one of them. I got the privilege of sitting under his ministry and he preached his heart out to us every week. 

But he would do it from this position of being he thought so badly of himself that he would never dream of putting himself forward. He's the opposite of some of the type A personality that kind of says, yeah, let me do it. He's the exact opposite, but called by God, thrust out into the ministry by compelled by God and used by God and then burned out. That's another story. But yeah, pray for God's work to be done. 

That's what Jesus said. Pray earnestly to the Lord of the harvest. We've got to kind of reject human categories, I think, and be willing to be. I mean, it does help if someone can stand up and speak, but we're not intimidated. We'll have into our preacher's group, the School for Heralds, we'll have someone come in there who's terrified and stumbles and stutters and is really struggling. 

We'll give them a bit of feedback and say, here's the feedback, try and incorporate this feedback, come back and have another go, because we don't know whether the guy who's terrified is actually going to overcome those nerves in a try or two and actually be able to function with God's help. It's obviously helpful if someone is, you could say, a gifted communicator. But in my experience, sometimes the people who are most gifted as communicators just don't seem to want to serve the Lord. You're like, why is that? Come on. But God does it His way. 

We can all pray for the day when a Whitfield or a Spurgeon comes, but in the meantime, we'll take whatever God gives us, even if they're stumbling over their words, but they're actually called by God. The question is asked, what is the role of deacons in what's been described? Equipping and entrusting, is there room for delegating some of these things like counseling and discipling to deacons, or is this purely an elder's responsibility? Come on, come on. Yeah. Preach it, brother. That's what I want to say. 

Amen, somebody. Is that right? Is that what you say? Yeah, I'll take that. What's the role for deacons? I think what you see in the book of Acts in chapter six is fantastic, isn't it? I do take them as kind of a prototypical deacon in Acts six, these seven men who are called, I mean, they're not called deacons. It's hard to say that is 100% sure that's the original deacon, but it's the basic concept of these guys were servants. They were filled with the Spirit. 

They were godly people, and they were chosen to take up some of the practical tasks that took the pressure off the apostles, who by the way were elders. Remember Peter saying to the elders, 1 Peter 5, as a fellow elder, I say. So the apostles were elders, and the apostles just said, we will devote ourselves to prayer and the ministry of the word. It's not good for us to leave off the ministry of the word to serve tables. That's the kind of basic problem, isn't it? And so the basic solution to that is godly people. 

You go to the qualifications for deacons in 1 Timothy 3, and it's just like, whew, these guys have to be dignified. They actually have to manage their own households well. The standards are high like the standards for elders. And you say, well, this is really serious. These guys have to be pursuing godliness. 

But their purpose is to take the pressure off the elders. So yeah, there's a huge role. Then you see one of those original seven, Stephen, just like blossoms. He starts preaching. He's out preaching. 

He's out using his miraculous gifts. He's flying about all over the place, empowered by the Holy Spirit. And then he's martyred, and he becomes the first martyr in Acts chapter 7. So I would say there's a tonne here that could be, there's a tonne of opportunity here for godly deacons. I would have zero problem having a godly deacon, and we already do, get involved in equipping ministry, in preaching. 

You say, deacon in preaching? Sure. Under the authority of the elders, within constraints, teaching what they can. An elder has to be able to, must be holding fast to sound doctrine so that he may be able to teach in sound doctrine and to refute those who contradict. That's a higher standard of ability to handle doctrine and the truth than is required of a deacon. It's a much higher standard. 

To be able to teach sound doctrine and to be able to contradict people who are, to refute people who are contradicting sound doctrine, that's a high standard of training for an elder. But a deacon still has to be sound in doctrine. He has to hold to the sound doctrine. So you could have a deacon who could, who's showing some giftedness in preaching, you could have him preach within his area of ability and stay within the area of ability. You have a deacon exhorting, you have deacon reading, you could have a, evangelizing, teaching in a class setting. 

What, you know, what's not to like about deacons getting involved in that? What about administration or stuff? Leading in different areas. Praise the Lord. What you would do is that if you had more godly deacons taking up more areas of responsibility as elders, you'd move into more of a supervisory advisory role and some of this stuff would take up less time and effort, right? About evaluating, meeting and evaluating new people that come to the church, showing hospitality to people, getting to know them, see whether is this a wolf or a sheep? Is that something only an elder could do? No. I'm just saying this is the job. This has to be done. 

That's what motivates us. We can't lower that standard so we have to say, well, this is what God requires of us. It must be done. If somebody else is doing it and they're doing it well, praise God. Is that fair on your side, Adam? You want to comment on that? You want to go home, don't you? It's 10. 

01. Ashley, go for it. You got the mic and the soundboard. I mean, you're in control, brother. We can't go unless you give us permission. 

Thank you. My question is, you mentioned during the title series that you should be able to throw, I think it was like a stone at the congregation and find someone qualified to be an elder. Should all men aspire to be elders or is it only for those who feel like they're gifted and called and qualified? Okay. I think all men should aspire to be elder qualified, beacon qualified. You can't put in what God has left out. 

Every man has to be teaching. Every one of us has to be teaching. I made that point. We're all supposed to be teaching one another, exhorting one another. We're supposed to take the truth we know and pass it on. 

We're not supposed to be dead end roads, as MacArthur puts it. But we're not all supposed to be teachers. We're not all supposed to be set apart and recognized as teachers. Why? Because it's one thing to want to teach, it's another thing to have people that want to listen to you. And that's to do with giftedness, isn't it? So unless somebody is gifted to teach, people don't want to listen. 

After a while, you're just like, when is he going to stop? And it's just painful for some people. And some people think they are and they're not. But I would say every single Christian should want to be deacon qualified, should want to be elder qualified as far as possible. Paul puts it very helpfully, he says, if a man aspires to the work of ministry, he desires the work of ministry, he desires a noble thing. It is, and here's the rub. 

I think the problem is, there's all sorts of people that want the office, but very few people want the labor. And there ain't no way around it. This is work. It is holy sweat. It is engaging in anxious toil. 

I didn't even talk about possibly the hardest part. Paul, when he listed his sufferings in 2 Corinthians, he listed all these sufferings he went through day and night in the deep and shipwrecks and beaten and all these long list of sufferings, he gets to the very end of it and he says, and apart from all these things, the daily burden of concern for all the churches. That to me is the hardest thing. Because I can't, if I had to carry a weight for any length of time, well, there's a weight that every elder carries that they cannot put down. They literally can't put it down. 

Because it's a weight of responsibility and a burden of concern for the flock. And you can't just kind of go, you know what, sorry, I'm off duty. I'm out. This doesn't affect me. Well, if you say that, you're not a shepherd, are you? I keep chickens in my back garden and you can't just sort of say, do you know what, today we're not going to worry about the foxes. 

You won't have chickens for long, will you? Because foxes will come in and they'll eat the chickens. This morning, when I came down, our dog was desperate to get out and I let her out and she went down to the end of the garden, ran around. And a few moments later, up the garden, running right towards me was the scrawny little fox desperate to get out of our garden, chased by our dog all the way down the garden. It's at four o'clock in the morning. Foxes will come at any time. 

It's just a ridiculous reality that foxes are just, they are there and they want your chickens. And if you want to keep your chickens safe, you got to hate foxes. Simple. You got to deal with foxes. And you can't say, sorry, you don't need to deal with them for now. 

I'm on holiday. All right. If you go on holiday and you're a shepherd, you have to make arrangements. Don't you? You can't just leave the sheep and take a walk. And so there's that weight of burden of responsibility and that is exhausting. 

That is personally the hardest thing because it's just like, it's constantly there and it's a burden of concern. I don't, as I said to you earlier, I still think it's the most wonderful job in the world. And I, sometimes people ask me if I want to ever want to go back to being an osteopath. I'm like, are you kidding? I loved my job. Absolutely love osteopathy, love what I did. 

I had a great life. There is no way I want to go back to that. I mean, I would if I had to to make ends meet, but it's just, I'd be in trouble because it's 10 years, more than 10 years, 15 years. But I would do it if I had to to provide for my family. But if people will allow me the privilege of doing this for the rest of my life, I will, if God allows me that privilege, I just don't want to do anything else. 

And that's despite all of this. I'm saying this is just the most wonderful thing and the most terrible thing at the same time. So don't feel sorry for us. Do pray for us. Do pray that the Lord would put it on people's hearts so that they desire this work of the ministry, because that's what it is. 

Are we done or are you still going on the questions? I'm looking at Adam. Oh, did you, you had one. Okay, there we go. Thank you. So it's going to take two to three years to get. 

. . Sorry, I'm not hearing. Okay, it will take two to three years minimum to train up these new elders. Oh, yes. 

In the interim, would you not use executive assistants, administrators, accountants? We do. Yes, sorry. Go ahead. Could you not have like an on-call rotor for someone who could check your emails during the night and they could delegate to you if it was like an emergency, just so that you can get more sleep and more rest? Thank you. Yes. 

Well, we do have staff, praise God. I mean, things have improved a lot. So we do have people who are on staff and they're pretty busy too. They actually carry us all, Adam. So I do wonder sometimes how we manage to be that busy, just because I look at other pastors in other churches and I think, I just don't know what we're doing, I don't know quite what we're doing different for us to be that busy, but I think it's to do, if I'm just going to say what I think has happened, I think it's to do with the fact that God is building a church full of relatively new people and relatively young people and people who have relatively recently discovered sound biblical teaching and who are hungry and wanting to be fed. 

And the whole thing is new for everybody. And what we don't have is the established, we have a lot more than we did have. We've got downstairs with the Sunday school workers some time ago and there's just room full of about 25 helpers in the Sunday school. And I was thinking back, you'll remember Fred, I was thinking back to the days in 2012 when Fred was our one and only Sunday school teacher and we had one class with a few children. But it's just always, the church has always grown that little bit beyond where we're at as far as staff and pastors. 

And so we've always been, for the last 11 years, we've always been just outstretched by the growth and the need in the congregation. And a lot of that need has been need for us as pastors. Like the email that I got this morning, there's no one else that could answer it for me apart from someone perhaps to say, Tom, we'll get back to you later today and leave me a voice message to say, there's an urgent email that you need to answer. Well, that's kind of the same thing. I think one thing that we can do as pastors is we have to increasingly, because of that crazy busyness, we have to increasingly hedge our personal walk and our family time. 

And I find I'm having to fight really hard to protect my time for preparation for preaching and teaching. And we have to engage in what MacArthur has, I think, helpfully called planned neglect, which is I plan to neglect everything else until I've done what I have to do. So just saying, okay, we're going to pray. I mean, that's my commitment. I have to do it. 

I just have to say, okay, whatever else is going on, I must pray. My most frequent exhortation to myself is just, Tom, just be faithful. Because I know I can trust God to take care of me in the pulpit if I have His help, if I don't pray, if I don't spend time confessing my sins, if I'm grieving the Spirit. I may be really well prepared, but it's no comfort to you or to me to know that I've got the words on the page, but I don't have the Holy Spirit helping me. So we do have to engage in this kind of juggle of planned neglect, focusing on the essentials. 

One of our elders used to say, as pastors, you have to be willing to let some things fail in order to focus on the main thing. And yes, that hurts the church, but you've got to be willing to let certain things not get done in order to allow people to see the need for them to actually do it. Because it's one thing for us to say, we need help in this, this, and this, but everybody's busy. Everyone's got their life. It would be one thing for us to say, look, we need another full-time, let's say, okay, dream situation. 

Adam, what do you reckon? Full-time pastoral counsellor, what do you reckon? Yeah, we'll take one of those, will we? Someone's offering us, someone's offering us, you know, like, here's a, here's a hundred thousand pounds a year. Go hire someone as a full-time pastoral counsellor, house them, you know, add in the cost of housing. We're not paying people a hundred thousand pounds a year, but you get the cost of housing, cost of taxes, cost of bringing people, someone over from America. Okay, here's a hundred thousand pounds. Go hire, go hire yourself a full-time pastoral counsellor. 

That would just, would just massively cut our workload in one easy go. But at the moment, we don't have someone saying that to us. So we, we all have to do what we can as we can. There's a ton of things like that where you could, we could hire someone to do this, we could hire someone to do that. We don't have the cash flow as a church. 

If people gave financially much more, then yeah, we could relook at hiring options. I suppose you could say to solve some of those problems in the meantime. Churches do do that. They create posts and say, look, this is like a staff position as a, you know, staff position overseeing the administration regarding tending the flock. And you give it to someone who's a very gifted administrator. 

They work within certain rules and they do, they kind of make it happen for everybody else. I think it, I think it's not ideal for some of those pastoral roles, but it's, I'd rather have someone who's elder qualified doing it. But it's a, it's a workable stop gap. I think personal adminis, personal assistant type work is hugely helpful for the pastors. And we do have some of that Dorcas works as our, as the kind of PA to the pastors, isn't she, as part of her job title, but she has a lot going on outside of that role. 

And, and, and when I say she has a lot going on outside of that role, she's, the other part of her job title is women's worker. And we'll, we'll always say to her, and same with Anita, look, if you've got the opportunity between getting your admin work done and someone here needs you to sit with them and give them some biblical counsel, go for the personal work. I mean, just do, do what people need and we'll suffer a little bit of administrative pain. I don't think Michael's changed that role, has he Adam? So I was, you couldn't see I was winking at you. Michael's driving the admin a lot, a lot harder and tightening things up, but he hasn't changed that basic fundamental commitment. 

We're going to always put people ahead of programmes, people ahead of issues and we suffer because of it, but I think people suffer less because of it. So I don't know if that kind of vaguely doesn't answer your question, but it's not an easy solution. I'm sorry. We done? No more questions? Okay. Well, Adam, would you do us the honour of closing in prayer and. 

. . Lord, thank you for our study this evening and we thank you Lord for this church, for this local body and the people you've brought here. We thank you even over the years how we've seen the growth and maturity of the people here, even the pastors and those under our care. And we do pray Lord, as was prayed earlier, that you would raise up men who can take part in leading these people. 

Lord, do you know who should be in that position? And we do pray Lord that those who should be there, that in your work, in your providence, that they would be the men who are put there and Lord that you would protect us from those who should not be. Make that evident as well. But in all this, may Christ be honoured, may these things stick with us and may we learn from them and grow from them. For the glory of your name. Amen. 

Amen. Amen. All right. Good night. God bless you. 

We're done. We'll see you all Sunday, God willing. Hey, Adam, visiting preacher Sunday. Lance Roberts. Yeah, visiting preacher Sunday. 

Another fellow demon, as they are strangely called. He was also on the same Doctor of Ministry class that I took, but much earlier than me. But he's a pastor in Virginia now. He was in, I was about to say Czech Republic. He was in Czech Republic as a missionary with Grace Ministries International for many years. 

And he's now pastoring a church in Virginia, which is like down the road from where you grew up, right? So Adam's got to know him and he's coming in next Sunday. This coming Sunday, I should say. So exciting times. We look forward to that. And then next week, Donna and I will be here and we'll do our marriage Q&A. 

So it's a series of Wednesday night Bible studies. I don't know what we're going to call this, kind of August madness or something. I hope you're enjoying it. God bless you. We'll see you Sunday. 

. 