---
title: "Transformed Priorities for Young Men Titus 2:6-8"
date: 2022-10-16
draft: false 
---
Well, it's an encouragement to have so many of you back after last week. I'm sure that some of you lovely young women were really looking forward to hearing what I have to say to the young men, maybe to balance things out a little bit. If you weren't here last week, we're in Titus chapter 2, and we're looking at God's design, His intention for the way that His church should work, the way that we as Christians interact with one another and love one another. So last week we looked at God's expectations and His priorities for young women, and we looked at how we have to uphold a countercultural priority if we are going to uphold God's priority. There were some tricky things, some difficult things to think about. Hopefully, for most of us, it was an encouragement to consider how we can honor God. I've certainly been struggling this week because my wife is out of town and feeling the absence of her help and love. 

My mom's been here, and you keep praying for us. My wife comes back at the end of this week, but me and the boys are momless and wifeless, which is if you see me shaking or walking around aimlessly, you know why. But I want to look this week, I want to continue this little series on God's intentions for young saints by looking at God's expectations for young men in the church. So let's start by reading our text, Titus chapter 2, verses 6 through 8. The word of the Lord reads, likewise, urge the younger men to be self-controlled. Show yourself in all respects to be a model of good works, and in your teaching show integrity, dignity, and sound speech that cannot be condemned, so that an opponent may be put to shame, having nothing evil to say about us. Let's pray. 

Lord God, to be a Christian requires submission to your will. It requires us to call you Lord and Master, to see ourselves as your slaves. And what that means is that you decide our purpose. You decide our place. You decide what we are to live for. And we're seeing in Titus chapter 2 that what you call us to live for is not what the world expects of us. We are grappling with a different set of priorities, a different set of expectations that come from the mouth of our Creator. 

Lord, it is our heart to submit ourselves to your will, to conform ourselves to the image of your Son. And so today as we study God's expectations for us young men, please help us to be humble, to be willing. Empower us to be faithful to do the hard work of obeying you. Help me as I speak to speak clearly and humbly. Help the Word of God to convict and to challenge and to encourage. Lord, let us be like you, no matter the cost. Let us glorify you, no matter what the world thinks. 

Let us be image bearers for your glory and our good. We pray this in your name. Amen. Rejoice, oh young man, in your youth. And let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth. Walk in the ways of your heart and in the sight of your eyes. That quote sounds nice, doesn't it? It kind of sounds like what the world is currently encouraging young men to do. 

Rejoice in your youth. Let your heart cheer you in your youth. Walk in the ways that delight you. In a world where women are now encouraged to take leadership and focus on independence, men are encouraged to do the opposite. Where women are now able and expected to lead, men are expected to do nothing. We're encouraged to reject leadership and responsibility, to stay dependent on others, and to seek comfort, ease, and pleasure. Now our society is living with the consequences of these priorities. 

You don't need me to spend the next five minutes reading off a whole bunch of statistics about how desperate our society is, marked by joblessness, infidelity, addiction, pornography, and perhaps most shamefully, our abandonment and murder of our children. Our society is buckling under its own weight because it's crippled its leaders with their sin. Rejoice, oh young man, in your youth. And let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth. Walk in the ways of your heart and the sight of your eyes. That's not something I found on social media. That's not an age old proverb from the world. 

That's a quote from the Bible. Those are the words of Solomon, the wisest man who ever lived. Now is Solomon telling us that the world is finally getting it right? That we've finally freed men up to celebrate sin and pleasure and now we're doing what we should be? Well, no, he's not. And here's why. That quote isn't the whole quote. I've cut it short. Let's read the whole verse. 

Let's read all of Ecclesiastes 11 verse 9. Solomon says, rejoice, oh young man, in your youth. And let your heart cheer you in the days of your youth. Walk in the ways of your heart and the sight of your eyes. But know that for all these things, God will bring you into judgment. Solomon tells men, young men, to be men. To rejoice in the strength and vigor of their youth. 

To pursue that what makes them joyful and gives them pleasure. But he says, we do this with the understanding, with the expectation that we will be judged for everything we do. And if you're going to be judged for something, that means that there is a standard, right? You can't be judged without there being an expectation. And that means that if we're going to pursue the things that please us, if we're going to pursue the delight of our eyes, we must let that pursuit be defined by God. We will be judged for our actions, young men, so we need to live, we need to use our God-given abilities to be who God intends us to be. That begs the question, what does God intend you to be? God commanded our father Adam to be fruitful and multiply, to fill the earth and to subdue it and to practice dominion over it. What that means is that with the help of our wives, young men are to build families full of God-fearing image-bearers and to work in this world to cultivate God's glory. 

God has made men, He has designed us to be well-equipped to do this. We are strong and energetic, we have vision and passion, we want to be married and have children, we want to cultivate wild things and repair broken things. These are good things that are a part of a good God's good design. And if we delight in God's glory, we will use those things He's given us for what He intends. But the problem today is that we are rejecting God, we are rejecting His glory. Our world has told young men to take what He's given us and do one of two things with it. To use strength and energy to seize what we want, to reject authority and to chase after pleasure at all costs or to reject masculinity altogether. 

To pretend like we aren't made for a specific purpose and try to blend the sexes together in a muddle of confusion. But if we realize and remember that we're going to be judged, then we need to make sure that we are doing what God expects. God has given us power, men, He's given us strength and He has given us, whether we take it or not, whether the world gives it to us or not, authority. We cannot reject that, but we must not misuse it. Biblical manliness is power under control for the purposes of God's glory. Power under control. In our text today, Paul tells us in all seriousness that if you young man want to honor God with your life, you must learn to be self-controlled. 

You must not use what He's given you with abandon, but with restraint and stewardship. See, our world tells you and wants you to feed the pleasures that you want, to feed your desires, and God tells you to control them and direct them. If we want to be godly men, and we should, we must be self-controlled. That's it. We must be self-controlled. And the big idea for this sermon is that by God's grace, the church, all of us, must know and follow God's expectations for young men. We must know them, we must know what He expects of us, and then we must follow that. 

We must submit, we must put ourselves in a place where we can meet His expectations. So our outline today is simple. We need to start by knowing God's priorities for young men. We're going to look at the text of Titus 2, 6 through 8, and see what God expects. And then, just like last week, we'll take a few minutes to figure out how as a church do we follow God's priorities for young men. So we start by knowing His priorities, and second, we will hopefully follow His priorities. So knowing God's priorities for young men, two things. 

God expects young men to practice self-control. That's what you see from verse 6. God expects every young man in the church, every Christian young man, to practice self-control. But then we'll see from verse 7 and 8 that God expects young pastors to model self-control. We have the expectation for young men, and then we have the expectation for young pastors to be the model, to be the example of what self-control looks like. So let's start with verse 6. Let's see what God expects of young men. 

Verse 6 says, likewise, urge the younger men to be self-controlled. Now if you've been reading Titus 2 and you get to this point, a reasonable question to ask, is this even fair? Let's review. Older men, they have to be sober-minded, dignified, self-controlled, and sound. Older women, reverent, not slanderous, not slaves to wine, and disciplers of young women. Young women, lovers of family, self-controlled, workers at home, pure, kind, and submissive. Young men, self-controlled. That doesn't seem fair. 

Right? Come on, that's a tiny list. What's the deal? Right? Young men are, we just said, all this power, all this responsibility, all this authority. They're working, they're getting married, they're raising kids, and all they have to do is be self-controlled? Paul doesn't even tell them to be kind. What's the deal? Why would he say that? Let's find out. Let's see why Paul is so brief and so specific. He starts by saying likewise. What does he mean by that? Well he means that the pattern for young women, where they look to someone to disciple them, should continue for young men. 

But young women look to the older women in the church, right? And we talked about how Titus and the elders can't exemplify what it means to be a faithful woman since they aren't women. But young men, he doesn't say, be discipled by older men, does he? He says likewise, you, Titus, urge the young men to be self-controlled. He actually says you in the original language. It's a command. Paul tells Titus to be that example, to be that disciple, that teacher, that person for the young men to submit to. Paul instructs Titus to take on this specific role of obviously teaching the whole church, right? That's what it said in verse 1. He's instructing the whole church, but with young men, he is getting into their lives and he is urging them. 

He is being specific. So I'm supposed to urge young men, right? That's what the text says, young pastor, you need to urge young men to be self-controlled. So this is the point where I can do that, right? I can take the gloves off, right? I can get loud, I can get in your face, I can call you out for all the ways that you're failing. After last week, I know that many of you have been bracing yourselves for this sermon because you assume that if I'm going to urge you, I'm going to let you have it. I used to go to a church where that's exactly what the pastor would do. Every few months, he'd get in the pulpit and he'd come in strong and he'd beat up the young men and he'd say, what are you doing with your lives? Don't you know better? And it would scare us, right? We'd say, oh yeah, you're right, okay, wow, yeah. We'd go, well, we're going to toughen up, right? And for a couple of weeks, we'd all be really self-controlled and then it would be right back to where it was before. 

So is that what Paul is saying here? Is he saying, Titus, shame those young men, beat them up, make them feel bad? I think it could be that. I could do, it could be a tough guy man talk, but I think it's more complex than that. You see, the word that he uses here when he says urge young men, this word is all throughout the New Testament. In John 14, Jesus says, if you love me, you will keep my commandments and I will ask the Father and he will give you another helper to be with you forever. That helper we know is the Holy Spirit, but that word translated helper is the same word we have here for urge. So the Holy Spirit is an urger. And then in 1 John 2, 1 through 2, John writes, but if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 

The same word advocate is the word that we have that means urge in our text. Now what does that mean? That means that just as the Holy Spirit is our helper and Jesus is our advocate, the young pastor is to be a person who urges young men to be self-controlled. That tells us that there's a nuance to this. To urge is an act of love, of grace. It's not anger, it's not judgment. I'm not to be your drill sergeant. You're not showing up for basic training and I'm just breaking you down to build you up again. 

I'm a fellow soldier. I'm in this battle with you. Young pastors need the same exhortation to be self-controlled that every young man does. Now if a fellow soldier tells you to get in line, that should be way scarier to you than if a drill sergeant does. Because he is there with you on the front line. If you don't listen to him, somebody's going to die. So of course there's an urgency. 

Of course there are teeth to urging someone. Depending on the situation, it can look a lot of different, it can be a lot of different things, but it's always steeped with grace. Because when a pastor like me corrects and urges, he does so as a brother who's in the same boat. The stakes are high. Brother, if you are failing to be self-controlled, you should be ashamed of yourself. Because you're not meeting God's standard for you. You're not doing what you were made to do, and that is shameful. 

But we want godly grief that leads to repentance, not embarrassment. We want to move from that disappointment in our failure to repentance. Repentance is clinging to the cross, putting off sin, putting on righteousness, and rejoicing in the forgiveness that God gives. That is the ultimate goal of someone who is urging someone else in this biblical sense. It's repentance, not conformity, transformation. And that's what Paul has in mind when he says that pastors are to urge young men to be faithful to God's standard. We need to urge young men to be faithful. 

But before we do that, what is the standard? What am I to urge young men to? Well the text says to be self-controlled. God's standard, his priority for young men is self-control. Now here's one little note I want to make. If you look at verse 7, it says, show yourself in all respects to be a model of good works. But that phrase, in all respects, in all things, it's actually at the beginning of the verse, the way Paul wrote it. So the way that it could read is likewise, urge the younger men to be self-controlled in all respects. And I think that that better captures what Paul is doing here. 

He's saying, yes, be self-controlled, but you've got to be self-controlled in everything. This is a full spectrum commitment to discipline. Paul wants young men to be self-controlled in all respects. So is he saying that all we have to do is be self-controlled? If he's saying, if you can say you're self-controlled, you're good. We've talked about how everyone in the church has to be self-controlled. Christians are self-controlled people, but why does he focus in on this with young men? Well I think rather than saying that self-control is the only thing young men need to focus on, you need to see self-control as the foundation of faithfulness to God's commands. It is the bare minimum. 

Self-control is the most basic part of Christian maturity and sanctification. It's like dribbling in basketball or football, right? It's just the basic movement. You have to be able to do that. It doesn't matter how good you'd be at shooting or defending or any other thing. If you can't dribble, you're not on the team. You're not playing the game. You could be a great teacher or preacher. 

You can love to serve. You could be really generous or really good evangelist. But if you are not self-controlled, your faithfulness is crippled. You're like a brick wall with no mortar. Like a cake with no eggs. Have you ever made a cake without eggs? It's not good. It's just soup, all right? It's the essential building block of Christian growth because you have to kill sin. 

You have to put on righteousness, but the sin has to stay dead. It's not one thing one time. It's again and again and again. And we've talked so much about self-control as we've studied Titus. We've got sermons you can go back and listen to. But how do we define self-control? If we're going to just do a brief definition of what it is that every young man needs to be, we can keep it really simple. Self-control is telling yourself no. 

In a world that is encouraging you to pursue everything you want whenever you want as often as you want, self-control is learning to say no. Stop it. Down, boy. Right? Now the key of this saying no, the key of this self-denial is the motive. We've talked before about how there are lots of really self-controlled people in the world. Some people are naturally self-controlled. Some people are very driven and they are self-controlled people. 

We've got Fortune 500 CEOs. We've got multi-million break money star athletes. We've got people who are really self-controlled, but the motive for them is their own glory. It's their own pleasure. The Christian pursues self-control for another purpose. In Luke 9, 23, Jesus said, if anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me. To be a follower of Jesus, you must deny yourself. 

That's self-control. You must take up your cross. Self-control hurts. It's withholding pleasure for something better. It's saying no now to say yes later. And you must do this daily. This is a lifelong commitment. 

And you do these things because you are a follower, a disciple of Jesus. This is about loving him and glorifying him. That is the standard that Paul urges when he says young men are to be self-controlled. And as we said, it's in all things. Self-control is like a dam that holds back the water of sin. And if your dam has a hole in it, it is compromised and it will eventually collapse. You can't say, I'm really self-controlled over here. 

This area, not so much, but it's pretty good. Only a matter of time before that thing collapses. Paul says you don't get to choose which areas that you're self-controlled. You are self-controlled in all respects if you're going to be sound. So Paul says that pastors like myself are to urge young men to be self-controlled in all things. So let's take a minute and do that. Now men, this is the point where you need to humble your hearts and open your ears. 

I've been praying, we've been praying that God uses these words to convict and to encourage and to change us. So turn to 1 Thessalonians 5. 14. In 1 Thessalonians 5. 14, Paul is writing to the leaders of the church and he gives a similar command. And we urge you brothers, admonish the idol, encourage the faint-hearted, help the weak, be patient with them all. Paul actually uses the same word for urge here as he did in Titus 2, but he gives a pastoral framework for what caring for people looks like. 

We are to admonish the idol. We are to encourage the faint-hearted. We are to help the weak and to be patient with them all. So I want to take that framework and use it from my exhortation to the young men today. That means that we start with idol young men. To be idol is to be willfully lazy, to ignore expectations and do nothing. If that's you, then you need admonishment. 

The word admonish is the most forceful of the words in this list. To admonish someone is to say, here is the standard. Here is where you are. You are failing and you need to fix it. Admonishment is tough talk. It's real talk. Now as we've already said, all of that is couched in love. 

The goal is change for God's glory and for the good of someone, but it is real talk. Here's my admonishment. Young men, if you are an idle, you are the opposite of self-controlled. If you are the opposite of self-controlled, then you are failing to meet God's expectation for you. Idle describes what most young men in our society aspire to be. Most of us were idle if we aren't still idle. Because our culture produces men of idleness, men of laziness, men who exist only to satisfy their pleasures. 

Is that you? Are your responsibilities an afterthought? Or even worse, do you avoid them? Do you prefer to spend your time and your effort on your pleasures? Do you have any restraint? Do you ever tell yourself no more? If your life habits consist of staying up late, waking up late, working as little as possible, freeloading off of your parents and friends, and focusing your efforts on entertainment, video games, hobbies, and sexual fulfillment, then you are idle. That describes what the world wants you to be. But is that you? Brothers, does that describe your life? Husbands are your responsibilities as a husband and father, an inconvenience to you. Do they get in the way of what you really want to focus on, whether that's your work or your own pleasure? Do you rush through parenting, through caring for your wife, to focus on your desires, your pleasures? Do you do the bare minimum at work at home so that you can have the time to focus on what gives you pleasure? An easy way to assess this, has your lifestyle changed dramatically since you got married or since you had kids? If you are taking the responsibility of being a husband and a father seriously, there is no way your life looks the same after you engage in marriage and parenting. It cannot look the same. If it looks the same, something is wrong. Is your life defined by idleness, by a passive pursuit of pleasure? If so, then you have one biblical response, repent. 

Idleness is self-idolatry. When you're idle, when you aren't working, you are easy prey for your flesh. Brothers, you need to discipline your mind and your body and your efforts towards worthwhile things. Because let's get real, brother. God doesn't care about how good you are at video games. He's not impressed with your knowledge of whatever imaginary expanded universe you're excited about. He doesn't rate you by how many social media followers you have. 

And he doesn't even care how successful you are in your business and your work. God made you to lead, to cultivate, to build, to protect, to provide. God made you to be a faithful steward of his blessings. Do not waste the intelligence and the strength and the passion of your youth on worthless pursuits. If you are idle, then you're wasting your life. The precious gift that God has blessed you with. Now if you are failing, if that describes you, like I said before, you should be ashamed. 

Because you're sinning. You're offending God. But it doesn't end with shame. Shame is the spark that lights the flame of conviction and repentance. You're not to be embarrassed. You're to cry out to God, ask him for help, ask him for the strength to change. Ask your brothers and sisters in the church for help. 

But you have to stop being idle. You cannot be lazy and be a faithful man. Not all of you are idle. A lot of the men in this church are eager to put off idleness. They have seen these and other commands in scripture and they have seen what the world has made them and they are rejecting it. They are eager to pursue righteousness and discipline and diligence. Did you know that every month 10 or 15 or 20 guys show up at my house on a Friday night and we look at the Bible and we figure out how to be men of God. 

That is amazing. Young men saying, I will not be what this world has told me to be. I will be what God has called me to be. There are many men in this church who are eager to become diligent, disciplined young men. And it's not just the single men. The husbands and the fathers see it too. They see that if they continue down the path the world has set them on, they will not be faithful and they are working earnestly and diligently to change. 

But man it is hard work. And there are days where the idleness of the past conquers and they feel the pain of this uphill battle. It's discouraging and you are faint hearted. You've had a bad week and you've failed. You've had a bad month and you're discouraged. Well the text here tells me to encourage the faint hearted. The faint hearted is the person who sees the good, wants the good and is struggling to do the good. 

And let me encourage you brothers who are faint hearted to soldier on. Be faithful. Trust the Lord that he will honor your desires. For many of you, for many of us, our upbringing and our culture is working against any desire you have to be self controlled. And you feel that pressure intensely. Now we're not going to let you whine about it. You need to be a man. 

You need to accept responsibility. But it is challenging. It is difficult work and the best things usually are. So persist brothers. Keep going. Keep pursuing discipline and self control and holiness. You don't have to give up hope. 

Why? Because God is with you. God wants you to succeed. Sometimes when we're fighting sin it starts to feel like everyone's against us and maybe everyone else is but your savior is not. He has promised to help you and he has actually given you everything you need for life and godliness. You can persist. You can grow. You can conquer sin. 

You need to be faithful. You need to commit yourself. You need to work hard and you need to trust the lord. Now the last thing Paul says in this list, actually there's two more things, but he tells us to help the weak. Now to help means to invest in, to love. This is where words stop and actions begin. So we admonish the idol. 

We speak the truth to them and tell them to change. We encourage the weak. We speak the truth to them and tell them to carry on the faint hearted. But the weak people are people who lack what they need to succeed. People who are hampered. Who are at a disadvantage. Well our culture is producing weak men. 

Even if they know what they need to be, they haven't been equipped to do what they need to do. They don't know what it means to work diligently. They haven't seen faithful husbands and fathers as examples in their lives. They haven't been taught, they haven't been educated, they've actually been trained to do the opposite. So we need to help the weak. We need to help where they lack or where they fall short. We need to come alongside them and pick them up and encourage them. 

Now that is something that the church is here to do. Brothers you are not fighting this fight of faithfulness alone. We want to come alongside you. We want to encourage you and equip you. Now church, sisters and older brothers are you invested in the faithfulness of our younger men? We can't just bemoan their failures and call them out. We have to help them. Many of them are eager to grow. 

Let's be their helpers. Later in this sermon we are going to come back and say how as a church do we help the young men. Help these weak young men who want to be strong. Because that is what we need to commit to doing. Now the last part of 1st Lesleunians 5. 14 we are to be patient with them all. If we are talking about encouraging young men to be self controlled, like I said we are talking about a long uphill battle. 

And many of the times when you are admonishing a young man about his self control it is because his lack of self control is causing you pain. You are late. You dropped the ball. You are inconsistent. And that means that we can respond to young men in these situations with impatience and frustration and a lack of grace. But Paul tells us to be patient in our instruction. Are you a patient admonisher? Do you come alongside and love young men who are trying to do this? Now this text, 1st Lesleunians 5. 

14, this is not just about young men. This is just how we love one another. You can go do this with any situation in the church and I encourage you to do it. But talking about young men being self controlled, that is what we need to do. We need to admonish, we need to encourage, we need to help with patience. So verse 6 of our text, we are talking about Titus chapter 2, 6 through 8. We are talking about knowing God's expectations for young men. 

And it starts by seeing that God expects young men to be self controlled. That is what verse 6 tells us. It is not optional. It is not a command. You can't say, well I would be self controlled but, not an option. You must be self controlled. But Paul doesn't just want Titus to teach self control. 

He wants Titus to live self control. He wants Titus to be an example of self control. And that is our second point. Verse 6, young men must practice self control. Verses 7 and 8, God expects young elders and pastors to model self control. Let's read those verses again. Paul says to Titus in verse 7, show yourself to be a model of good works. 

And in your teaching show integrity, dignity, and sound speech that cannot be condemned. So that an opponent may be put to shame, having nothing evil to say about us. Paul expects Titus to practice what he preaches. We all know the life of a teacher is the proof of his integrity. Titus is expected to be careful in regard to this because he is a young man. So he is the counterpart to these young men. Young men are going to look at their pastors to see what self control looks like. 

Paul tells Titus to show yourself. When he says this he is saying, you are an exhibit. The young pastor is an exhibit of godliness to a young man. As the businessman obsesses about every element of his presentation, so the young pastor has to be carefully considering how every element of his life is a testimony to his teaching. This is a command for Titus to be personally, intentionally invested in his behavior because young men need to be watching him to see how they should behave. Now what is Titus to be? He is to be a model, an example, the archetype. If you were to say, what does this look like? The first person you should think of should be Titus. 

Titus is to teach and exemplify and that means he needs to make sure that every element of his life is in conformity with what he teaches. Now is this because of fear of man? Does Paul just want Titus to look good? That is not what verse 8 tells us. Look at the end of verse 8. Paul gives us the so that. This is the reason why. He says, so that an opponent may be put to shame having nothing evil to say about us. If you remember last week, we talked about how the home demonstrates the power of transforming grace. 

It demonstrates our integrity to live as Christians out of the home and in the home. But the home is something the world looks into. The home is our place to cultivate and take care of. But young men, you are called to be in the world. You are expected to leave the home and to go out into it. We are to be in the world working in it so where the Christian home is a privately maintained beacon of God's grace, the Christian man carries the light out into the world. That's a big deal. 

You might be the only person that your friend knows who is a Christian. You might have coworkers who have no other experience of a Christian person than you. You need to live with integrity so that the world has nothing to accuse the church of. That's the standard that Paul is telling us to reach here and that's why the stakes are so high. This is the same principles we saw before with the elders that they ought to be above reproach. This means that when they are accused the accusation doesn't stick. Young men, we represent Christ. 

We represent the Bible. We represent the church in the world and the workplace. We are the primary examples to a watching world of Christian faithfulness. Whether we like it or not, whether we are good at it or not, that's what we are. Now this is true of young women in the workplace. This is true of all of us, but in Paul's context where he is saying young men are to be the people out working, they carry the strongest burden of that integrity. So Titus needs to exemplify that so that the people who follow his example can exemplify that. 

Do you see that? There is a chain here. So what is Titus? How does Titus show this example? Genesis 2-8 say in the ESV, in our normal translation, they say, show yourself in all respects to be a model of good works and in your teaching show integrity, dignity, and sound speech that cannot be condemned. Now that's a fine translation, but what it makes it sound like is that Titus is essentially to be a model of good works and to have really good teaching. But I think that the legacy standard Bible gives us a more helpful translation. It says, show yourself to be a model of good works with purity and doctrine, dignified, sound and word, which is your approachable. What Titus is to be a model of is four things, good works, incorruptible teaching, dignity, and sound speech. Paul is giving four elements of an exemplary life that God expects for pastors to exemplify to young men. 

So let's look at each of them. Titus is to be a model of good works. This phrase good works is all over Titus. We're going to keep coming back to this as we study this book. But good works is what happens when a Christian is transformed by Jesus, right? They become a zealot for good works. See, Christian living isn't about uncovering some secret knowledge. It's not about chasing spiritual experiences. 

It's about living a life that's transformed. The power of our testimony is the fact that we live on this same broken world with the same broken bodies, but we do so in a way that's empowered by God to fight against that brokenness. Where the world fails and struggles and is stuck in the mire of sin, something about the Christian should stand out. We are different because by God's grace we are being transformed. When Paul says that we need to be an example of good works, he's saying our daily actions and behaviors must demonstrate that God has changed us. You should not be how you used to be, Christian. You ought to be different. 

You must be transformed. You cannot look the way you used to. You certainly don't look where you want to be someday, right? We're all growing, but you shouldn't be the same person. You have a new identity, a new perspective, and a new purpose. Is that showing in the way you behave? Now that testimony, that example needs to be especially consistent in the lives of pastors like me. Now pastors are not super Christians. Being a pastor doesn't give you like an inside track or a booster pack on grace. 

I wish it did, but actually what it gives us is greater judgment. But the reality is that pastors need to live exemplary lives for everyone in the church, but particularly for younger men so that they can see what self-control looks like. So church, can I please ask you to pray for me and the other pastors? We carry this testimony of integrity on our shoulders. It is a great, a glorious burden, but it is a burden and we need protection. We need help. We need grace. Because when we are examples of good works as Christians, we hold out the light of grace to the world. 

So Titus needs to exemplify that for the young men to see. That's the first thing. He needs to be a model of good works. And second, he needs to be a model of integrity in teaching. Titus needs to exemplify doctrine that is sound and pure and accurate. He cannot be distracted. He cannot let his teaching be corrupted by the world. 

Now why would young men need an example of integrity in teaching? Well when pastors let the world dictate and corrupt their teaching, they show the world that their priority is not God's priorities, but pleasing man. See, Titus' work is teaching. What Titus produces with his work, with his efforts, is a doctrine, right? Something to believe. And if that truth is tainted and corrupted by the world, then it tells young men that it's okay to do the same. Now men, you might not work with words. You might work with your hands or with your keyboard. You might be in finance or law or medicine. 

But you must be incorruptible. How do you demonstrate that? Titus, a pastor, demonstrates it in his teaching. But what about you? How do you show the world that you are incorruptible? How do you show the world that you prioritize God's pleasure and not man's praise? We have to have integrity. Titus shows that by integrity in teaching. How do you show it? Now third, Paul tells Titus to be a model of dignity. We've talked about dignity with elders and old men. Dignity is a word that describes the result of self-control. 

If you practice self-control, you will end up being dignified. It's self-restraint, calmness, seriousness, and sobriety. All words which rarely describe young men. But Paul says that Titus, who is a young man, should be dignified now. And that means we all should be and can be dignified now. If we want to be dignified someday, we need to start practicing that today. So how do we be dignified? We must bring self-restraint and sobriety into our work, into our lives. 

There's a lot of ways you can think about this, but here's some basic questions. What do you joke about? What do you laugh at? What do you show up for and what do you skip? How do you demonstrate that you love God and that you love others? Are your co-workers comfortable with you and your priorities or does the way you live make them uncomfortable? How are you standing out in an immature world that is abandoning responsibility? How do you demonstrate maturity? See, good works are a result of self-control in our actions. Dignity is a result of self-control in our character. Young pastors exemplify this and young men aspire to it. So Titus is to be an example of good works, of integrity in teaching, of dignity, and finally sound speech that cannot be condemned. Titus needs to take care with his words. If we are inconsistent with our words, brothers and sisters, then we are open to attack. 

Now this doesn't mean that we're not going to get attacked, right? Jesus says, if they hated you, they hated me first. If we commit to faithfulness in the gospel, we will be attacked, but we need to make sure that when we are attacked, we haven't left an opening. We haven't made it easy. Our testimony of what the gospel is and what we believe and what is true should be sound and sure. You must be above reproach. It must be that what you say and the way you live match up so that you can protect your testimony. Now maybe you don't work in words, but this principle of above reproach must apply to whatever you work with. 

You should be consistent in your dealings, whether you're a computer programmer, a plumber, a designer, a lawyer, a doctor. There can be no gaps in our spiritual armor. Titus sets an example of self-controlled speech so that young men can see how it's done. He does all of those things. He's a good model. He is a model of these good works and these actions and these characteristics so that young men can see what it is that happens when we practice self-control. Older pastors are a particular type of example for the young men. 

We're meant to practice what we preach. Now does that mean that older pastors are not a part of this? No, it doesn't. But they have a different kind of influence. Older pastors aren't in the same life stage, right? In general, they're done with the things that young men are trying to figure out. And so they play the part of wisdom and instruction. They can come along and give counsel in how to be faithful. But they aren't in the trenches like Titus, like young pastors. 

And that's important because young men have a particular tendency to have a difficult time thinking ahead. We're very in the moment. Most of us, myself included, look at older men that we're inspired by and we say, I can't wait to be like him someday. I can't wait to be like Tom when I'm older. But what we don't think about is, what do I need to do to be like Tom when I'm older? What has he done? What did he do 20 years ago that I need to be doing now if I want to get there? So the combination of the testimony of older pastors, the wisdom of older pastors, and the diligence of younger pastors combines to give young men the structure that they need, the example that they need to be faithful. Do you see that? So we've said first that God's priority is for young men to practice self-control. And second, we see that God's priority is for young pastors to be examples of self-control. 

That's what God expects. If we're going to know God's priority for young men, that's what it is. That's what we see in our text today. But we also need to follow it. And that's our second point. How do we as a church follow God's example? And I say as a church because it takes all of us to be faithful. Anything that one of us is to do, we all help one another to do. 

Amen? So just as we did last week, let's spend some time now thinking about how we as a church follow God's priorities for young men. Now last week, you remember I said we need to cultivate fear of God. We need to cultivate biblical masculinity. And we need to cultivate biblical fellowship. Well, this week, we're going to cultivate biblical masculinity, cultivate biblical fear of God, and cultivate biblical fellowship. It's the same thing. We need to start with a view of what God expects men to be. 

How do we cultivate biblical masculinity? See the church's ability to make sure that the men in this building, in this fellowship, know what God wants of them. Because everyone can see that the current system isn't working. If you want to, you can go home today and you can get on YouTube and you can type the word masculinity and just see what comes up. And what it will show you, I don't necessarily recommend you do that, what it will show you is that the world has diagnosed this problem. They've gotten far enough to say, something's wrong with the men, which is always a really encouraging sentence. Something's wrong with the men. And then they start providing all of their solutions. 

Some of us encourage young men to be tough, to be hyper masculine, some sort of American frontiersman independence, right? You got a beard on your face and an ax on your back, go fix the world. Some people want men to return to the sort of Victorian ideal, this man of business and manners and culture. Some people are going back even further, they're going back to the Greeks and the Romans and they're saying we need this classical philosopher stoic man. Now there are good elements of the, and there's a million other approaches. There are good elements of these approaches. There are times where the tunes of these approaches hit the same notes that we do when they line up with what the Bible says. But biblical manhood is simple. 

Biblical manhood is about self sacrifice. If you want to be a man, you sacrifice yourself. If you want to know what it means to be a man, you don't need to get on YouTube and find everyone's favorite or least favorite influencer to follow. Christian, you need to look to your savior. If you want to know what a biblical man is, why would you go any further than Jesus Christ? He was strong, but he was meek. He was driven, right? He came with a purpose. He set his face towards the cross, but he always had time for the needy. 

He was on a mission, but he was tender. He was a communicator of great truths, right? The greatest truths that have ever been spoken on God's earth, but he loved the simple. He loved the sinner. He loved the outcast. He was all of those things that these worldly solutions tell you to be, and he was not because he was interested in self sacrifice. He was the greatest of men, but he died the lowest of the low. Jesus is the perfect example of power under control. 

He took all of the opportunities and gifts that God had given him, and he used them to accomplish his mission, which was to die. He's the ultimate example of self denial. See, biblical manhood is looking for opportunities to die to self. That is self control. It takes this example, and it applies it in the boardroom, in marriage, in parenting, in the church. Men, men in this room, you were made to love and to lead. That's what God has designed you to do. 

You are to cultivate this earth by working diligently and raising a family of God-fearing image bearers. So a biblical man is going to take that God-given strength and use it to control himself, not others. Biblical masculinity understands that practicing self control is the way that you accomplish your purpose in life. That's the vision of biblical masculinity that we need to treasure in God's church. Church, we help young men follow God's priority for their lives when we tell them what that priority is, when we hold up a beautiful, compelling, difficult vision of masculinity and say, do it. But it's not enough to just teach it. Every Christian who wants to be faithful needs to know what God expects of them, but they also need to cultivate biblical fear of the Lord. 

What's the point of knowing it if there's no reason for you to do it, right? Fear of the Lord isn't just being afraid of Him, it's loving something that is all-powerful, loving someone who is mighty and in full control of everything. We talked about how women needed to fear God because they needed to accept that His created order is better than the order that the world tells us to prioritize. Young women need to fear God because the world's priorities seem better and more enticing. Men need to fear the Lord because He's made us leaders and we will answer to Him, the creator of the universe. We will answer to Him for our leadership and responsibility for our success and our failures. We need to fear God because our failure to accept responsibility has grave consequences. You remember we looked at Ecclesiastes 11. 

9 and Solomon told us, go be a man, but you will be judged. Young men, we are going to stand before God and give an account for everything that we do, before God. You wouldn't want to stand before me and give an account of all that you've done. But I'm not all-powerful, I can't do anything about it, right? But you're going to stand before God. So pursue your career, but remember that you'll be judged. Pursue your marriage, but remember that you'll be judged. Pursue your parenting, but remember that you will be judged. 

And even pursue your passions and interests and hobbies, but remembering that you will be judged. The fear of God's judgment will help us be careful. But this judgment isn't just future. We're not just talking about the end. There are current judgments that God promises, current consequences. Let's just look at two texts, 1 Peter 3. 7. 

We read it last week, let's read it again. Likewise, husbands, live with your wives in an understanding way, showing honor to the woman as the weaker vessel, since they are heirs with you of the grace of life, so that your prayers may not be hindered. And then 1 Timothy 5. 8, but if anyone does not provide for his relatives and especially for members of his household, he is denied the faith and is worse than an unbeliever. Here is where we see that the judgment of God for our faithfulness to his expectations isn't just in the future, it's right now. Brothers, if you do not love your wife, if you do not shepherd her heart with understanding, God will not listen to you pray. Does that terrify you? Does that sober you up and make you careful? Are you thinking now, if you're single, about what it's going to take so that you cannot get into that place in the future? God expects you to extend grace and kindness to your wife just as he's extended it to you. 

If not, you're going to be judged now. And God expects you to provide for your family. And Paul says that if you don't, you're at best a hypocrite and at worst, you're apostate. A failure to be a provider means that you have no real sacrificial love in your heart. Now Paul is not saying that if you can't provide, you failed. He's saying if you don't provide, either because you're lazy and have nothing to give or because you're selfish and have nothing to share, then you're not demonstrating the grace and the love of God. We talked last week, too, about all of the things that happen when we fail to lead our wives, when we fail to make submission a joy. 

When we fail to lead biblically, we don't just bring judgment on ourselves, we bring consequences on those around us. There is terrible fallout to this kind of failure. We must fear God, brothers. We must fear being in the path of the wrath of God. He designed you to do something. Don't fail to do it. But remember that we fear a gracious and a loving and a forgiving God. 

We've been looking at these expectations for young men and young women, and these expectations are wildly countercultural. Most of us are starting to try to be faithful very late in the game. We're undoing decades of training and thinking and expectations. So can this really change? Can we really believe that we can actually do this? The answer is yes. How do we know? Do you remember when we read Titus 2? Titus 2, 11 through 14? For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation for all people, training us to renounce ungodliness and worldly passions and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in the present age. Brothers, your God loves you. He expects much of you, and He will judge you if you fail. 

But He loves you, and He has given you everything you need to succeed, to be faithful, to progress, to grow in godliness. Friends, Jesus came to earth and died so that you could be saved from these false expectations. He made you His slave. If you're a Christian, you have the grace you need to be transformed. You have to believe that the God who saved you is willing and able to transform you. He will change your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. He will change your desires to conform to His expectations. 

He will make you new and make you able to give Him glory. He promises that. So we fear Him and we love Him, and that's the complexity of loving a God who is the God of this Bible. We fear judgment. We cling to grace. We must grow. If you want to practice biblical masculinity, we have to cultivate a biblical view of God. 

And that goes hand in hand with the biblical view of what a man really is. When the church does this well, it will cultivate a heart in young men to do what God has called them to be. But last and not least, if the church wants to help young men succeed, we must actually help the weak. We must come alongside them and aid them in their quest for godliness. And that means that if we're going to follow God's priorities for young men, we must cultivate biblical masculinity. We must cultivate fear of God and we must cultivate fellowship. Fellowship. 

This is a church-wide effort. We've talked about what elders and pastors are to do, but what about older men? How do older men help? Because Paul doesn't tell Titus to have the older men teach the younger men, does he? He says the elders are to do that. So does that mean the older men just sit back and watch whatever happens? No. See, older men come alongside and they back up the elders' testimony. When they are sober-minded and dignified and self-controlled and sound, they show that when God is faithful, there can be progress, there can be growth. And in addition to this, older men can come alongside and hold the younger men accountable. They can show them what it looks like. 

They can present the biblical standard and help us figure out how to do it. Older men, you can encourage us to be men. You can help us figure out what that looks like. You can stick around after church and spend time with the young men, encourage them to grow. You can have them in your house, have them in your workplace, and show them what you're doing. Show them what you did. Hear their plans and step in and say, I did that too, and it did not go so well. 

Right? We need that help. We need that investment. When older men invest in younger men, it is a blessing to the church. What about women? How do the women help? Well, women who value God's expectations in this day and age are usually suffering. If you're a single woman and you are looking for a man who is a leader and a sacrificial lover, then you are in general quite discouraged because there just aren't that many out there. And the ones who are Christians still have a lot of work to do, right? Let's be frank. And if you're married, then you're often married to one of these men who is not very self-controlled. 

He probably knows that he needs to be because you're graciously in his life comforting him and telling him how he can grow. But it's discouraging. And the temptation for women is to become bitter, to be angry with young men for their lack of self-control. The temptation is to grumble and complain. And this is very understandable. Brothers and sisters, I want to encourage you to be gracious, to give the same love and patience and kindness to young men that God has given to you. Your brothers do need to grow, but their society has not equipped them well. 

They are weak. They need to be trained to do the opposite of what they've been trained to do. Does that make sense? They are learning, and many of them want to learn. So come alongside and encourage them. Create their attempts to lead even when it goes really poorly, because they're trying, right? And don't hold them to an impossible standard. Don't expect them to be good at this. Expect them to be trying. 

Pray for them. Few things on earth bless a man more than the encouragement of a woman. Women can help. And there's another way that the church helps follow God's priorities for young men and young women. The church helps young men and young women by parenting faithfully. If you're a parent or you plan to be a parent, you need to make sure that your home is set to God's clock. That the standards that you implement for your children match His standards. 

If you set your standards by those of the world, don't be surprised when your children go right along with it. We need to commit to equipping our children to love the role that God has given them and to do it faithfully. We need to lay a foundation for countercultural families. Not for counterculture's sake, right? Not to be rebellious. But where the Bible tells us to be different, we need to commit to being different. And in the home, we can do a lot of really good work. So make that investment. 

And finally, back to the young men. You need to take your role seriously. If you've made it this far through the sermon and you haven't been convicted yet, I pray that it comes now. If you are not self-controlled, you are failing and you will fail. You will fail to be a faithful Christian. You will fail to be a faithful employee. You will fail to be a faithful husband and follower. 

You will fail to be a man. You need to determine where you are weak. All of us need improvement in self-control. Now I'm not telling you to all turn into neurotic productivity experts, right? What I'm telling you to do is hold yourself up to the expectation of Scripture and conform yourself to Christ's image. Self-control does not happen by accident. You cannot trip into self-control. You must climb the mountain of faithfulness. 

It is a fruit of the Spirit, but it comes with diligent effort. Listen to how Paul describes it in 1 Corinthians 9. He says, do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one receives the prize? So run that you may obtain it. Every athlete exercises self-control in all things. They do it to receive a perishable wreath, but we an imperishable. So I do not run aimlessly. I do not box as one beating the air, but I discipline my body and keep it under control. 

Young men, you need to work hard. If you're single, start by getting a job. Get a real difficult job and work so hard that the only things you have energy for are church and sleep. You can eat while you're sleeping. Learn what it means to work. Practice diligence. Then, when the young ladies see you and you want to marry one, you say, I already know how to work hard, so you can bet that I'll figure out all the other stuff. 

And bring that work ethic into your involvement into the church, into your faithfulness to God. Join the other men in this church. Get real biblical accountability. Participate in worship, in men of the word, in fellowship group. Show up on time. Sing. Pray. 

Serve and evangelize. Love your wives and your families. If you don't have a wife or a family yet, get time in other Christians' homes and learn what faithful manliness looks like. Ask questions. Ask answers. Brothers, you have to kill your sin. That doesn't happen on accident. 

You have to be intentional. You have to deny yourself. You have to prioritize the right things. God has blessed you because He's put you in a church that wants you to succeed at this. It is not the interest of your elders to make you attractive to this world. We don't want to make this church a place the world feels comfortable. We want the church to be uncomfortable with you. 

Because you're different, because you're transformed, because something about you smells like Jesus. So commit yourself to learning and practicing self-control. We need to follow God's priorities for young men. To cultivate male leadership is to work against the grain of this world. Some might say it takes a village, but the Bible says it takes the church. We have to do this together. Young men are designed by God to build and to lead the world. 

We were put on this earth to establish His will, to put His plan into action for His glory and for all of creation's benefit. But our enemy has been diligent to undo that work. The world gives young men what we want and it makes us useless. We are ineffective. We are hamstrung and at best we are dangerous. And even Christian men struggle with this so that when the world looks at us they see nothing different, nothing compelling. And that is why the church must know and follow God's priorities for young men by God's grace. 

We young men must commit ourselves to self-control. And the church must commit herself to celebrating self-control. The task is great. We are not going to change the world. That's not our mission. By God's grace we can be transformed. And when we are transformed we show our integrity to the world and that is a gospel testimony that glorifies God. 

Is that what you want? Young men, is that what you want? It's what you need. Let's pray and ask God for help. Lord Jesus, we desperately want to follow Your example. We see that if we want to be men, You have shown us what it takes. We need to sacrifice ourselves. We need to love to the point of death, even death on a cross, for the people that You have entrusted us with. Lord, we are not trained to be sacrificial. 

We are not trained to love in the biblical sense. We are trained to love ourselves and pursue our pleasure and to reject the authority of God. So Lord I pray for the men in this church. I pray for those who are idle, for those who are rejecting self-control that You would convict, that You would break stony hearts. I pray that the men in this room who are not yet submissive to Your leadership would repent and become Your sons. And I pray for the young men in this church who see Your standard and want to meet it that You would encourage them and equip them. Make our church a church where young men are encouraged and helped and exhorted and admonished and blessed to be the men God called them to be. 

Help us to honor You. Help our church to honor You. Thank You for blessing us with Your truth, with Your expectations for every one of us, old and young, man and woman. You haven't left us in the dark. You've shown us what we need to be. So help us by Your grace, by Your Spirit to do so for Your glory. We pray this in Your name. 

Amen. . 