---
title: "Faithful Fathers"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
# ＂Faithful Fathers＂ - Titus 1_6-7
 Well, please find your way in your Bible to Titus, Paul's letter to Titus and to chapter 1. Today I want to zoom in on verses 6 and 7, Titus chapter 1 verse 6 and 7. I want to talk to you today about the need for faithful fathers, faithful fathers. If you're just joining us today, this is part of a series of sermons working through the book of Titus, Paul's letter to Titus. Last time I spoke about finding someone faithful and the title of today's sermon is just simply faithful fathers. We're in Titus chapter 1. This part of the letter is the apostle Paul is writing to Titus and giving him a list of qualifications for potential leaders, qualifications for elders and for the various churches on the island of Crete. And this is so helpful for us. We need homegrown men to be leaders of this church, don't we? We need elders for the future of our own church that come up from within our own ranks. And so we need faithful fathers in this church. And I want you to remember that the leaders are also supposed to be examples for all of us. And as we're thinking about these qualifications for elders, we get the picture that God wants all of us to aspire to, to reach to the standards that he sets out as requirements here for elders. God wants you to look like this. I guess if you're a mother, he doesn't want you to look like a faithful father, but you get to know what a faithful father ought to look like by looking hopefully at an elder who is an example in that. And so today we're focusing on Titus 1.6 towards the end of that verse and on into the beginning of verse 7. And this is where Paul gives us a qualification for elders that is going to show us the incredible need we have for faithful fathers. But I'm just going to read it to you again, then I'll pray and we'll get into the sermon. Titus chapter 1, I'm reading from the legacy standard Bible. Paul, a slave of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ for the faith of the elect and the full knowledge of the truth, which is according to godliness in the hope of eternal life, which the God who cannot lie promised from all eternity, but at the proper time manifested his word in preaching with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our savior to Titus, my genuine child, according to our common faith, grace and peace from God the father and Christ Jesus, our savior. Now here we're going to hear why Paul is writing this letter, why Paul left Titus on the island of Crete, the instruction he needs. For this reason, verse 5, I left you in Crete that you would set in order what remains and appoint elders in every city as I directed you, namely, if any man is beyond reproach the husband of one wife having faithful children who are not accused of dissipation or rebellious, for the overseer must be beyond reproach as God's steward, not self-willed, not quick-tempered, not addicted to wine, not pugnacious, not fond of dishonest gain, but hospitable, loving what is good, sensible, righteous, holy, self-controlled, holding fast the faithful word which is in accordance with the teaching so that he will be able both to exhort in sound doctrine and to reprove those who contradict. Well, let me pray and we'll get into the message. Father in heaven, we pray that you would be glorified today. We pray that your truth would be proclaimed and that all of us, every single one of us would receive it humbly, submissively. Lord, change us by the truth, sanctify us by the truth, save us by the truth, we pray. And we ask it for the sake of your holy name. We pray for the help of your holy spirit in Jesus' name. Amen. Well, did you ever look at a job advertisement and think to yourself, I would love to do that? And then you read on and there's that dreaded E word. You know the dreaded E word under requirements? Experience. And you're like, oh, how do you get into a job in that field when the only jobs in that field require experience? You've been there? Okay, I know some of you have. Okay. But did you ever flip that and put yourself in the position of an employer? You've worked like crazy to build up your precious business. And there it is, your baby, your business. And some young employee has the potential to wreck it in the short space of time. And so you're looking for someone who will be the person who helps or wrecks your business. What do you want from him? You want someone who knows what they're doing, right? You want experience and it gives you a bit of a different perspective on the E word, doesn't it? You're looking, of course, they are looking, people who are advertising for people with experience are looking for someone who not only says, I think I could do that, but who actually can do it. Now, it doesn't really matter for some jobs, of course, but if that one employee does have the potential to wreck your business, well, maybe you can relate to the requirement for experience. Maybe you can't relate to that being an employer, but at least you know that when you go to see a doctor or your mechanic or you even get a roofer to fix your roof, if it's something which has important consequences attached to being done right, you want to know that they can do the job right. And they're not just winging it. They're not just blagging it, we say. They're not just words. They've actually got the ability. Now, it's really no good for someone who applied for the job to say, I think I ought to be able to do it. You want to know that the person who has that job has shown that he is able. The other week we started working through the qualifications for elders, the qualifications for church leaders. And that's here in Titus chapter one. The problem for us today is to understand how you can know that someone has the necessary skills when you're trying to find someone to be a leader in God's household, leader in God's church. Thankfully, God inspired the apostle Paul to give this text to Titus 2000 years ago. Titus, you need to know that Paul wrote to Titus when he was on the island of Crete. This is about AD 62 to 64. And there are all these brand new congregations full of brand new Christians. And there's not one pastor among them. There's not one elder who's been there in the church previously because they're all brand new churches. And Titus' job, according to Paul, is to appoint elders in every city. That's where all these congregations were. Now there's a problem. There's a huge problem. If you read ahead in Titus, if you were here the other week, you know the problem that Cretans, not Cretans, but Cretans are not the most reliable people on the planet. Do you remember that from verse 12? Look at it quickly if you're there. Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy glutton. How about that as a description of Cretan society or maybe London society? Maybe 21st century Britain in some places, isn't it? And that was from one of their poets, but Paul says this testimony is true. Now here's the problem. How do you find someone qualified, someone with the skills and the abilities to be a faithful shepherd of God's people, a faithful pastor, leader, elder in God's house, in God's church, in his household? How do you find someone to fill that role when everybody's like this on the island of Crete? Well, actually it's not just finding someone with today's qualification. Last week I talked about finding someone faithful to do with finding someone who was a one woman man. How do you find someone who's got the characteristics required to fill a role like that? Well, Paul tells Titus to look for potential candidates and they have to have certain qualifications to do with their marital, to do with their sexual faithfulness. Can they be described? Paul asks, can they be described as a one woman kind of guy? Is that the description that you would apply to that man? Okay, that's someone you could potentially consider. That was last time. We spent a long time thinking about how badly we need, we desperately need people who are faithful in that level of marital faithfulness. There is an epidemic of unfaithfulness today, isn't there? I'm not just talking about adultery. I'm just talking about men who are not one woman kind of men, men with their eyes over everyone, men whose hearts run after everyone. It's not just men, is it? It's the women too. We are in an age of adulterous hearts and eyes and minds. It's kind of bad, isn't it? God, in the middle of that, calls us, calls you to faithfulness. He calls you to be a one woman kind of man, a one man kind of woman. You say you need examples of that, don't you? The church of course needs examples of that. An elder, Paul says to Titus, must be an example of faithfulness in marriage if he's not qualified. Now, a quick reminder, we're not looking for perfection, are we? Remember that from what it means to be above reproach? An elder must be enough of an example to be called legitimately above reproach in that area, in the area of marital faithfulness. Church needs men who are examples, but actually this qualification of faithfulness at that level is also kind of telling about someone's character, isn't it? If someone is not faithful to his own bride, how would you expect him to be faithful to the bride of Christ in the church? I mean, that's a pretty obvious extension, isn't it? We've lost that. We don't expect that kind of faithfulness of our politicians or anyone these days, but actually the Bible does draw that line of connection between a man's faithfulness at home to the one nearest to him and his faithfulness in every other area of life. What makes you think you're going to be faithful to the bride of Christ if you're willing to lie to your bride? Now, and that's more than just being an example, isn't it? What are we looking at here? This is kind of, it's more than just his faithfulness to his wife being like the necessary experience so that he can simply keep being faithful to his wife when he's an example in the church. It's not just that, it is that, but there's more than that. There's a sense in which the whole track record of faithfulness is one evidence of the character necessary to be an elder. Faithfulness to his wife is a quality that shows that he's a faithful kind of guy. Can I put it like that? And the point here is that the kind of guy that a church needs to be an elder is someone who will also be a one woman kind of guy, even if he's not married and that was last time. Well, I don't want to go over it for too long, but we're in Titus 1 and verse 6 again. And the point now today is that another way that you can evaluate someone who, whether someone has the necessary skills and character to be an elder in the church is to look at how they do as fathers in their own household. This is another way we can evaluate the character and the skills of a candidate. It's going to drive us to look at the need for faithful fathers. Do I have to say there is a crying need, a desperate need in this age? If ever there was an age that needed faithful fathers, it is this one, isn't it? I could take you through statistics, but it's not necessary, is it? Because it's so, so painfully obvious. Well, have a look with me again at Titus chapter 1. Let's pick it up quickly in verse 5. For this reason I left you in Crete that you would set in order what remains. That's going to be the rest of the book after chapter 1. And appoint elders in every city as I directed you. That's what we're focusing here in chapter 1. But now in verse 6, namely, if anyone is beyond reproach, the husband of one wife, that was last time, and here we go for our text today, having faithful children who are not accused of dissipation or rebellious for an overseer must be above reproach. Now listen, as God's steward. And we'll stop there. This section that I've just read to you from the end of verse 6 to the beginning of verse 7, that is the next qualification. It begins with those words, having faithful children, or if you're reading it in the ESV, and as children are believers, or the NASB puts it like this, having children who believe. And I'm going to talk about the difference in translation next time. But for now I just wanted you to get the main point. Look at this. The next qualification in this section runs all the way from that phrase about children into the beginning of the next verse. Look at it carefully, please. I want to take you through all of it, but I want you to see the link. You'll see that after talking about the children, there's a comma. Always look at the punctuation. The original didn't have it, but it's there for a reason to show you how the original Greek is put together. In the ESV, it says, and not accused of, debauchery and so on. In the Legacy Standard Bible that I read from, who are not, and then it goes on to accused of dissipation and so on, and rebellious. In the NASB, it's just a comma, and then not accused of. And the point is that the next phrase that comes at the end of verse six is still talking about the children who are faithful or believing and who are not accused of dissipation or rebellion. Are you with me? I'm kind of taking you through a bit of a grammar lesson. I just want you to follow with me. Don't miss this. Verse seven begins with the word for. For the overseer must be beyond reproach. Now those words must be, mean that this is an essential qualification. Are you with me? He must be above reproach as God's steward, but that one word for links him being above reproach as God's steward, and it links that back to the statement at the end of verse six. And that means that this qualification to be above reproach as God's steward has something to do with his children. You're like, whoa, okay, Tom, you're dragging us through the obvious. I know. But I want to draw the connection because I'm going to try and show you that there's some serious help in that connection. If I'm going to state the obvious, it's only a qualification for him because the life and behavior of his children impacts whether he's going to be considered as above reproach. You'd say or not. In other words, it's possible. Let me just say this. It's possible for the life and the behavior of his children to mean that he's not above reproach, beyond reproach as God's steward. And that's why I'm calling this sermon Faithful Fathers, because we're looking at the children. But when you're looking at someone to consider whether they're qualified or not as an elder, their children are something like a portfolio of their work. They're something like the evidence. They're something like, not the experience, but they're something like the testimony of a referee who says, yes, they can do this job. They've got the necessary skills. There's an issue here. And the issue is that the quality you need in an elder is the kind of quality that makes him a faithful father. I'm drawing a connection here between faithfulness maritaly and how that becomes a qualification to be an elder and faithfulness here in the home as a father and how that becomes a qualification of someone that makes a faithful elder. Now, has anyone gone to sleep or just kind of drifted off into a different planet? Maybe you're in a different version of the universe somewhere. Can I just summon you back? We'll leave the grammatical deep explanation aside now. If you got lost, don't worry. You can go back and visit that again in the recording afterwards. What I want to do now for the rest of this message is first of all to show you why your elders must be faithful fathers. And I want to show you that from this text. And then I want to show you what the Bible says more in general about how you can be a faithful father and what you will see thirdly in a faithful father. So if you're taking notes, three points, why, how and what. Why your elders must be faithful fathers, how you can be a faithful father and what you will see in a faithful father, how you can tell I suppose that a father is being faithful. All right, number one, why your elders must be faithful fathers. Look at this verse seven. We're going to go to the end first and work backwards again. Verse seven, Paul gives us another word that helps us to understand the job description of an elder. It's translated here as steward for an overseer must be above reproach as God's steward. When was the last time you met a steward? When was the last time you had anyone called a steward? Probably when you watched Lord of the Rings last, if that was something that you watched, you heard about the steward of Gondor and those things, that's kind of old fashioned terminology. It's a good word, but it's an old fashioned word. The Greek word is a little more helpful, oikonomos, oikos in Greek means house, nomos is law. This is the man who is to do with the law of the house. BDAG, that's kind of Greek geeks acronym for the best dictionary of all Greeks. It's not, it's Bauer, Danker and another few people, but anyway, this is like the best Greek dictionary that's there. BDAG lists the meaning of this word as, and I quote, manager of a household or a state, house steward or house manager. I'm saying this is like a household manager. The word is used in the Septuagint, the Greek translation of the Old Testament in Isaiah 36 verse three, when Sennacherib invades Judah and comes to besiege Jerusalem, if you know your Bible, you remember this and it talks about the Rapshaka coming. Do you remember that frightful period in Isaiah 36 and there's this siege of Jerusalem and Isaiah then talks, the author in Isaiah talks about the man called Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah who goes out on the wall to speak to the Rapshaka. Anyway, it describes him as being over the household and that means he was over the royal household. This is a household manager. This is the kind of description that you could use, although it's not used in the Septuagint using this word, of Joseph when he was made the household manager of Potiphar's house. He was put in charge of everything. The elders, I'm going to just say this, according to this word, an elder, a leader in the church is a household manager. That's part of the job description. Now that's helpful. Turn quickly if you're quick in your Bibles to Luke chapter 12 and verse 35. You remember Jesus told the parable about his return, and in Luke 12, 35, he told everyone, stay dressed and ready for action and keep your lamps burning and be like men who are waiting for their master to come home from a wedding feast so that they may open the door to him at once when he comes and knocks. And he's talking about his return. Do you remember this parable? Luke 12, 35, 36, he goes on to say that if the master finds them awake and ready, he will dress. That's the master will dress himself for service and have them recline at tables and then he will come and serve them. I mean, this is just an incredible picture, isn't it, of the Lord's return and how he's planning on blessing us if we're faithful. And then he links the whole parable to his own return in verse 40. He says, you also must be ready for the son of man is coming at an hour when you do not expect. Wow. Do you like that thought? Now what was Peter's response? Teacher, are you telling this parable to us or to others? Is this for us? Are you talking to us? Jesus responded to that question with another parable. Now look at verse 42. This time he's going to use our word. Who then is the faithful and wise, what's our word? Manager, oikonomos. Who then is the faithful and wise household manager whom his master will, listen, set over his household. Are you getting the picture? Set over his household is the picture of a household manager. Now he goes on to give a description of what they're supposed to do, to give them their portion of food at the proper time. Blessed is that servant whom his master will find so doing when he comes. And that's the kind of verse that makes your pastors tremble. Right? Okay. Oh, I don't want to be found faithful doing what you want me to do when you come. I don't want to be the wicked lazy servant who goes off and gets eats and drinks and feeds himself and gets drunk and no, I want to be found faithful serving you guys and giving you your food at the proper time. Anyway, the point here is this is our word and it's the word manager, oikonomos, household manager. Now we could get a lot of helpful thoughts by thinking about that parable. I just want you to get the main point that elders are the managers of God's household, the managers of God's household. Look at Titus 1, 7 again, God's steward. A steward for God. A steward, you would say, of God's household. A household manager of God's house. What's God's house? This is the household of God, isn't it? And so an elder has that responsibility. Now, can you see why Paul is linking that responsibility with an elder's, you would say, performance of his duties, his faithfulness in the home as the manager of his own home? Can you see that? You see the link between verse 6 and verse 7? Because in verse 6 he's saying having children who believe or children who are faithful, however that is to be translated, we'll talk about that next time. But they're not to be accused of dissipation or rebellion or rebellious. That can't be true of them. Why? For, for, here's the linking word. An overseer, that's an episkopos, a bishop, an elder, it's another word for the same thing. You remember that from the first sermon in this series. An elder must be, has to be, it is necessary that an elder be above reproach as God's household manager. Are you seeing the link? I tried to show it to you. I hope you're beginning to see it. This is exactly the same idea as Paul really lays out plainly in 1 Timothy chapter 3. If you want to turn there very quickly. 1 Timothy chapter 3 verses 4 and 5. What Paul is saying here in Titus is basically, look, if things are in a mess in the home, he can't be above reproach as a household manager. If his own household is in a mess, how can he be above reproach as a household manager of God's house? I mean, that's just, that doesn't compute, does it? And you say, well, no, it doesn't compute. Now look at 1 Timothy 3 verse 4 and 5 verse 4. He must manage his own household. What's the word? Well. Oh, well, he must manage his own household well. Ouch, Paul. With all dignity. Ouch, Paul. Keeping his children submissive. Oh, for if someone does not know how to manage his own household, how will he care for God's church? Are you seeing the link? This is terribly painful, sifting, I think terrifying stuff for someone in my shoes. And it ought to be, right? I mean, this is the kind of thing that ought to make us think this is a high and holy calling. Can you see why Paul says in effect in Titus 1 and in 1 Timothy 3, elders must be faithful fathers. Obviously, if there's something that raises a serious question about faithfulness as a father, how can he be above reproach as God's household manager? Because people need to trust their leaders, right? If there's something out of order in the home, that means they cannot trust the man who's appointed to be their household manager. If they're looking at the way he manages his home and saying, well, that's a mess. Well, and I'm supposed to submit to him in the church. Well, that's just, it's just wrong. There's something wrong there. He's no longer above reproach. And I'm saying therefore that evidence of faithfulness as a father is like a character reference for the role of being a household manager in God's house. Can you see the link I'm drawing? And it's scary. I know. Don't you want to be like this? Can I just speak to all the men in the room, whether you're a father or not? Do you not want to be faithful like this? I want to be faithful. Did you have a faithful father? Most of you are saying to one degree or another, no. Right? You want to make those same mistakes and do to your children what your father did to you by his lack of faithfulness. I hope you're saying no. Do you want to be a godly faithful father? I want to be like Moses. You remember Numbers 12, seven? He is faithful in all my house. That was God's verdict on Moses. Wow. I want to hear those words from the Lord when I meet him. Well done, good and faithful servant. But I know that as an elder, I'm a household manager and actually in the two different versions of that same parable in Luke and Matthew, in Matthew the word God uses is servant and in Luke the word God uses is oikonomos, household manager. They're equated. Could I get to heaven one day and hear the words well done, good and faithful household manager? Could that be said of me at home? I want it to be said of me. I want it to be true of me. How? How? All right, this is point two in our three point sermon. There's always three points. The third one is going to be really brief. This one is going to be a little longer again. Don't worry if it goes long. The third one will be very brief and we'll punt into next week. What remains will get done in time. I want you to dwell on this. How? How can you be a faithful father? You say, well, I'm a woman. All right. Well, how can you learn what your husband, friend needs to do in order to be a faithful father? How can you help if you are going to be a wife? The wife's role is a helper, right? How can you help your husband to be a faithful father? You're not exempted from listening to this. It's God's word. It's for you too, right? What are faithful fathers need to be like? That's going to be kind of bound up in this, isn't it? How can you be a faithful father? I'm going to say it's really not complicated. I want to show you what the Bible in general says about it. Just in a couple of verses we'll look at. I think it's basically God knows you're thick, right? And I'm talking to me as well, but God knows you men, you're a bit thick. You just need something simple, something straightforward. Okay, turn to Ephesians chapter six, verse four. Ephesians chapter six, verse four. Here's a one verse wonder for fathering. Here it goes. Fathers, comma, do not provoke your children to anger, but is the contrast, bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. Okay, two parts, real simple. Number one, don't provoke them to anger. You got it? Great JMAX sermon on this. If you search for parents, do not provoke your children and put the word MacArthur next to it, you will get his sermon, 53 minutes of expounding this side of this verse. Really helpful. You could find some of the same material in MacArthur's book, Brave Dad would be a good buy. You can go to the Grace to You blog and find a little short article, How to Provoke Your Children. You want to know how not to do it, here's how to do it. And in that article and in the book and in the sermon, MacArthur lists a number of ways that he has observed people provoking their children to anger. I've got my own list. I'll give you his briefly, excessive discipline, inconsistent discipline. I would add to that pointless discipline and discipline given in anger rather than in love. Unkindness, number three on his list. Favoritism, overindulgence, overprotection, pressure to achieve. I mean, those are just some of the ways he's observed people provoking their children to anger. And maybe some of you are feeling angry just remembering what your parents did to you in one of those categories. Can I just say this? Do not provoke your children to anger. So dads, it's not simply all about being strict, is it? Do not provoke your children to anger. It's possible to be the strict dad that does provoke your children to anger. It's not all just about being loving, is it? Because it's possible to be a doting dad that has children that are actually frustrated and angry. There's a requirement here for you to be a considerate dad. That means considering the impact of what you do on your children so that you don't carelessly provoke them to anger. It means considering how they think and feel about stuff because obviously if you're not to provoke them to anger, you've got to be able to recognize what is happening in their hearts and you've got to be able to see and understand when you are provoking them to anger. So that means considering and being careful and thoughtful about your children. I mean, there's a lot bound up in this, isn't it? You cannot be the kind of dad who just couldn't care less what your children think or feel. Now, I think that is implied in the idea of not provoking them to anger, but please notice now that there is a contrast here. But, but, but, the word but is going to be the contrast that's going to introduce the alternative to provoking them to anger. So do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. Okay, here we go quickly. Discipline means that there are consequences. It's the Greek word paideia and it refers to a whole way of bringing up children using corrective discipline. Not, it's worth noting here that the Bible does not view children as innocent little flowers who are just waiting to kind of open their petals and blossom into the beautiful things that they were born to be. That is not the Bible's view of your kids. Um, Americans call them imvipers in diapers. We Brits speak about nightmares in nappies. But the sociologists in the 1960s and 70s rewrote the Bible. They didn't actually rewrite it, but they just gave us their own Bible. And their own Bible said instead of we all like sheep have gone astray. Each of us has turned to his own way. Their, their, their Bible says we're all sweet innocent little lambs until someone else somehow comes in and leads us astray. Those nasty people in our environment are responsible for all the nastiness in the world. So according to modern thought, children don't need discipline to restrain their innate evil. They just need the freedom to express themselves and all their inner goodness is just going to come out. Any of you experienced this kind of education? All of you, right? So we don't need to teach them rules anymore and enforce those rules. We need to just teach them to follow their hearts. And children don't need God, the good shepherd to restore their souls and to lead them in paths of righteousness. They just need to get in touch with their true self. And if only they could get in touch with their true self, their true self is going to lead them in the wonderful paths of movie stars and Oprah. And because movie stars and Oprah are also happy and, and, and they, they have such wonderful exemplary lives. Now I'm just going to say, fathers, if you want to be a faithful father, the Bible says you have to be bringing up your child using discipline. And what does it look like? Okay. It's loving, it's patient, it's firm, it's consistent, it's corrective and restrained, but it is painful. Hebrews 12, we're going to go there in a minute. Hebrews 12 says all discipline is painful. Get that word into your head. It's not supposed to be just like a cozy cuddle. That's not discipline. Discipline is painful. It's supposed to be memorable, but it's not uncontrolled anger. If that's your view of discipline, a beating, an outburst of, in an outburst of anger, unrestrained, uncontrolled. Okay. That's not biblical discipline. Biblical discipline is not injurious. You've got no need to worry about, well, you maybe do have to worry about this world telling you now that you're abusing your children when you discipline them because they're even outlawing smacking in Scotland. But biblical discipline is not vindictive or cruel. It's not injurious. It's not pointless. And there's a lot that we could say about all of that, but I think just I briefly wanted to hit those things and say to you as a faithful father, you have to discipline your children. It's your job. It's part of your role. It says fathers, bring up your children. Do not provoke your children to anger, but bring them up, raise them up, throw them up. That would be a way of translating that word. Nourish them up in the discipline and instruction of the Lord. If you spare the rod, you... No, you don't spoil the child. If you spare the rod, you hate the child. That's the biblical principle. That's the proverb. And it's just one part of what you have to do. Bring them up in the discipline and the other part, instruction of the Lord. So this is the Greek word, nouthasea. Nouthasea, this is where we get nuthetic counselling from. It's the idea of putting something in their heads. You, fathers, have to put stuff in the heads of your children. And you cannot, by the way, beat anything into the heads of your children. So this is talking about teaching. That's why it's translated as instruction. And yes, dad, this is your job. Sometimes the word is translated as admonition, and that's good, but some dads just get the idea that their job is just discipline and telling my children off. I'm going to admonish them and discipline them, and I admonish them, and I discipline them, and I play computer games. All right, that doesn't work as a dad, does it? Or I admonish them and I discipline them when I get home from work, and then I've done my job. If only my wife had admonished them and disciplined them whilst I was at work, then I wouldn't have to admonish them and discipline them when I get home. So now I'm really annoyed with them because they need admonishing and disciplining. I'm going to tell them off and beat them and put them to bed, and then my job is done and I can play video games or drink beer or watch movies or just rest, a little bit of me time. All right, is this biblical fathering? No. What is being spoken about here? This is instruction, the instruction of the Lord. What does that look like? Okay, a few pointers, very simply, it's talking about verbal instruction. All right, this is you're going to put thoughts in their minds, that means words, that means, hello, fathers, you have to learn to talk to your children. That is not mom's job, that here is your job according to the Bible, talking to your children. It's obviously addressed to their hearts about spiritual matters. That means you have to be talking to your children about the Lord. This is the discipline and instruction of the Lord. This is the instruction that's supposed to help them get to the point where they have an inner motivation and self-control. This is putting things inside their heads so that you don't need to apply what somebody once called the board of knowledge to the seat of learning. This is putting something inside their heads so that they restrain themselves from doing what would mean that they needed discipline. Obviously, you use discipline to give a kind of external control to your child, don't you? When they're young and they need external control to say, no, don't do that, they can understand the most simple, basic word no said in a particular tone of voice at the youngest of ages. They can learn very quickly that that word comes with consequences and when they hear that word, they're just like, stop. Whatever they're doing, they stop because there's a consequence that comes immediately and the children learn very quickly. That's external control and that discipline goes on and gets more and more complicated and more and more involved as time goes by. You're trying to get them to the point then with instruction where they are talking to themselves and they're saying no to themselves and they're saying, I must do this. You're not having to kick them out of bed in the morning because they see the benefit of getting up and they say, I've got to set myself an alarm because otherwise I won't be up and I'm going to lose the day. Instead of external control, they've got internal control and you say you're instructing them in the things of the Lord, they're turning away from laziness. They're embracing work as something good and you see that's internal control, self-control. Okay, how do you instruct children in that way? I think Deuteronomy 6, Mike preached on it recently so I'm not going to go into great detail but turn to Deuteronomy chapter 6 verses 6 and 7. I think this gives us just like another two verse wonder. These two verses, Ephesians 6, 4 and Deuteronomy 6, 6 and 7 need to be just like written on the wall of your parenting life. Deuteronomy 6 verses 6 and 7 and these words that I command you here today shall be on your heart. You shall teach them diligently to your children and talk of them when you sit in your house and when you walk by the way and when you lie down and when you rise. All right, let me break that down for you. Now listen, fathers and these words, talking about words, talking about concepts, talking about the law of God, talking about the word of God that God gave to them and these words that I command you today shall be where? On your heart. Now can I appeal to every person in the room? That means to be a faithful father, you have to have to be able to raise your children in the admonition of the Lord, you have to have first of all God's word on your own heart. What is on your heart? Is money on your heart? Is your career on your heart? Are the lusts of your flesh on your heart? Is that what occupies your mind and your heart? Is that what fills your heart? How many children are dragged to church by their parents on Sundays and then from Monday to Saturday their parents, mother and father drum into them, you have to succeed in life because you've got to be rich, because money is what matters. Why? Because money is what's on your heart, parent. Are you passing that on to your children? Is the word of God on your heart? Are the things of heaven on your heart? Are you teaching children that the things above are the things that you should set your mind on as we're told in the New Testament? You've got to have a new heart for this, haven't you? You've actually got to be changed. Jesus said out of the overflow of the heart the mouth speaks. So what do you speak to your children about? Money? Career? Is it just all about you? Do you even speak to your children? What is on your heart? What is on your heart is what comes out of your mouth. And this whole business of raising children faithfully, being a faithful father starts with you being converted, right? You've actually got to love God and want to obey him and read his word. You've got to be in the Bible. You've got to be soaking this book up so that when you open your mouth, what's on your heart comes out of your mouth and what's on your heart is God's word. And so it's just going to come out like this. Look at it. I mean, this is just incredible, isn't it? Verse seven, you shall teach them these commandments diligently to your children. Let's start with some basics, okay? You have to talk to your children. I said that already. But it also means you have to take time to teach the kids, teach them diligently. You don't just dump that role of teaching the children about God on Sunday school teachers. You don't just dump it on your wife. This is you fathers bringing up your children in the fear and knowledge of the Lord. And so that responsibility is squarely on your shoulders. If you're not doing it, no wonder your wife's falling apart. Can I put it like that? If you're not doing this, there is a terrible burden that your wife is trying to fulfill to be both you and her at the same time. Men, get in the Bible. Fill your heart with God and out of the overflow of your mouth, your children are going to hear about God, right? You have to teach your kids. You know, just don't just teach them in sit, okay, sit down and listen to me for the next half an hour. This is the stuff of life. Maths teachers say maths is life and life is maths, don't they? And parents who are trying to teach their children maths, they go around finding all kinds of opportunities to count things and to add up things. And they go to those annoying phases in the shops where the person in front of you in the queue is trying to teach their children to kind of add up and take away and get the change right. Is that the right change? And you're like, I've got to get out of this shop. And they're like, you know, can you please... Okay, they're teaching their children. Why? Because maths is life and life is maths. But what are we saying? We're saying God is life and life is God. And so every opportunity, wherever you are, you shall talk of them when you sit in your house and when you walk by the way, when you lie down and when you rise. That means all the time it's just coming out of you. It also means you actually have to spend time with your kids sitting in the house, talking by the way. That's a dad who's not just at work. That's a dad who doesn't just say, well, that's the wife stuff. That's kind of wifey's domain, kids, home. All that stuff is just wife. I just go out, I just earn money, I bring it back, I've done my job. That's my job. That's all her job. Sorry, men, repent. Listen to the Bible. This is your job. Bring up your children in the fear and admonition of the Lord. Get in the word and get involved in the life of your children. And maybe that means taking less time at work or less time playing, less time doing your hobbies and more time with your children. And that's obviously going to be necessary, isn't it? Because you're going to be talking to them when you lie down and talking to them when you rise. You've got to be there to some degree in their lives. True? Or do we just abandon the next generation to the TV? That's what's happened, isn't it? TV, computer games, where are the fathers? Where are you men? Where do you find faithful fathers? How are you going to be a faithful father? Well, this is it. It's not rocket science. It's not revolutionary, but maybe just plain old obedience to God's word has become revolutionary. And I'm going to say to you, men, it's time, when we say man up, this is what it looks like. All right. We're out of time. Number three, what do you see in a faithful father? I'm just going to say very briefly and we'll punt it to next week. Okay. Remember that we're not looking for perfection. We're not looking for perfection. You remember that from the list of qualifications. Remember in Titus chapter one, I read it to you earlier. It says for an overseer must be above reproach. And then there's a list and included in that list is the word holy and righteous. Well, there ain't no man who's perfectly holy and there ain't no man who's perfectly righteous. And so above reproach, even in the area of being a faithful father, cannot mean perfection. I said that earlier about being a one woman man. You can't be looking for perfection, but you have to be looking at direction. You have to be looking for a man who's pursuing faithfulness both to his spouse so that you would rightly say about that person, he is above reproach. He is an example. There's a man who stands out as someone who's actually doing it. Okay. He's not perfect. He sins. Man alive. I think of all the qualifications that I've been studying so far. This terrifies me because I can see all kinds of areas in my life that fall short of this. And if you want to find fault, you got places to find fault in my life. I'm praying that my faithfulness as a father will show adequately that I'm terrified. I'm terrified of all the failures that I know about. And I just want to be faithful. I am pursuing this. I hope that that is above reproach in my life. But I can say you can't look at perfection even in this qualification. And okay, what can you look at? Well, you can look at the children. And that's the point of this verse, isn't it? So six and seven says, six says having faithful children, the title of next week's sermon is Faithful Children. So what does it mean to be a faithful child? Should it say believing? We're going to look at that next week and I'll try to explain the debate that's there about the correct translation. But the point which is beyond dispute is that you have to look, you can look at the children. Now again, I'm going to say in the children, can I say this? Please, please do not expect perfection in the children. But there has to be a certain level of influence of faithful fathers on their children such that you can look at the children because that's what Paul tells Titus to do here, right? So let me just play this out very quickly. What will you see in a faithful father? You will see faithful children because faithful fathering produces faithful children. Perfectly? No. But so that you could say, yes, the children are faithful. Okay, we'll look in detail at what that means next week. If it's not true, then the elder is not above reproach. Can I say that? In this church, we are committed to that. If the elders fail at this level, we would do what we've seen done in the lives of those we've loved and admired where things have been not right in their home and they've stepped down from being elders and focused on their family. Praise God, we've seen people do that and their families got back in order and they've been able to step back into being an elder in due time. But this is the kind of thing that either qualifies or disqualifies an elder, right? You cannot be disqualified at this level and still be an elder. You ought to be able to see this in a faithful father and you ought to be able to see that a faithful elder is a faithful father. Hebrews 12 is true. Hebrews 12, let me just read you the heart of it. You can go and look at this in a little bit. Verse 11, all discipline for the moment seems not to be joyful but sorrowful to those who've been... But to those who have been trained by it, afterwards it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness. Okay, if a father is being faithful in the home to bring up his children in the discipline and the instruction of the Lord, well then according to this verse, the discipline is going to bring about the peaceful fruit of righteousness. Now it doesn't mean you can beat your children into righteousness but it does mean that there will be restraint, there will be restraint from evil. And if a child is wild and unrestrained, we'll look at this next week, but if a child is wild and unrestrained, there's a problem. Houston, we have a problem. If the children are wild and unrestrained, if the children are rebellious and unsubmissive and cast off their parents' control, does that mean that if your children have a temper tantrum and rebel against you, you're instantly disqualified? Thankfully no. But does it mean that if there's a pattern in that child's life such that everyone looking at the child looks at the child and says, that's just a rebellious child. Is that pastor qualified anymore? No. A pastor would have to step down and attend to the rebellious child. And how quickly all that takes place and what all that looks like is a conversation for another time and another place, but I'm just putting it out there in basic form. We'll go into it in more detail next week. You will be able to see the fruit of faithful fathering. Is that true? It's probably enough said. Do you agree with me that there's a crying need for faithful fathers? I see a lot of women nodding and a few men. What happens in families where fathers are not faithful? I hinted at this earlier. If their wives are faithful, their wives are driven to distraction trying to be both a mom and a dad. And man, that ain't good. You know the pain of the absence of faithful fathers because many of you have lived it, right? Children don't get brought up in the fear and admonition of the Lord. Children get up brought in fear of not having a good enough career and a good enough bank balance because you're teaching something, right? In churches, what happens in churches when churches look for elders and appoint elders who are not faithful fathers? It's a mess, right? I mean, I don't have to tell you it's a mess out there. Churches appointing elders on the basis that they're really, really good at business, but their family is in a mess. Oh great. Come and lead the household of God because leading the household of God is about employing business tactics to make the kingdom of God grow. Oh no. We're going to try and grow the kingdom of God using the devil's principles. Well, that's not going to work, is it? Where is that going to lead the church? These are the leaders of the church and they're qualified to lead because they abandon their families and built their career and they have the chairman of a Fortune 500 company. Why, he must be qualified. I mean, okay, some administrative skills would be very helpful and well received in the church, right? Blessings. But does that qualify a man? No. Where are you going to look? Okay, we're in the business of looking for potential candidates to consider as future elders in our own church, homegrown elders. Praise God that we're at that point. Who are you going to look for? What are you going to look for? I'm saying look for faithful fathers. That's what this text says. Very simple, isn't that? That's far more important than many another thing, right? What about if a father doesn't have... What about if a man doesn't have children? Well, we dealt with that last time, didn't we? Because if a man's not married and Paul did commend singleness, he didn't write off single people from being this. And yet he says, a man must be a husband of one wife. Let him be a husband of one wife. If any man is a husband of one wife, does not mean that every pastor has to be married. But if they're not married, well, where do you look in that person's life to see the qualities that would identify him as a one woman man? That's possible, isn't it? It's possible to see a man and say, he is faithful sexually, maritaly, even though he's not married. He's faithful to his future wife if he's ever going to be married. This is not the man with his eyes all over everybody and everything. This is a faithful, pure man of God. I'm going to say it's equally possible in the area of this area of being a faithful father, except it's more difficult because there's no children around. So if you're going to, you would say that if you're going to appoint a guy who hasn't got any children, you say, buyer beware, you better be careful because the children are the evidence, right, of the faithfulness and the fathering. What about if they're young children? Okay, it's still the same, isn't it? You appoint someone based on characteristics that you'd look for elsewhere. So what will you see in a faithful father? You're looking for the qualities that show that he's committed to this kind of fathering in the home. And then you hope that that will be transferable into the church. Agreed? So will you pray for it? Can I speak to every woman in the room? I know that I've been the unworthy recipient of the faithful, persistent, ceaseless prayers of my wife. As she, above all people in the world, has seen my failures at this level. I am such an unworthy recipient of those prayers and that patience. I'm going to plead with every woman in the room, would you plead with God for the men in this room? Thank you. Would you commit yourself to praying for fathers? Because it ain't easy. How can I plead with the men? Will you today go home, get on your knees, bow before God, repent of your sin in this area, and say to God, I'm yours. Help me. Help me to be a faithful father. Help me to lead my children to you. That's the greatest thing on earth, isn't it? You may not have children yet, but you have to start this faithfulness now. You're going to need to know the word of God to be able to use the word of God. So get in the Bible. Father, I pray that you would help every person in this room, Lord, to seek you. Above all things, we need you. We need you for real and not just as a tick box on our job application. Lord, we need the real thing and we pray that you would give us this real thing. We pray that we would know your presence in our lives, that we would know your forgiveness. Oh God, give us a holy fear of you that we would be able to bring up our children with that holy fear of you. We beg you to help us to learn about you, to really know and understand you, that we may be able to bring up our children, pass on to the next generation that knowledge that you have given us. Help us to be those who do this for your sake and we pray that we would be able to find faithful men to be elders in this church, to be able to carry the gospel to the next generation. We ask in Jesus' name. Amen.