---
title: "＂The faithful Servant's Holiness＂ - Titus 1_8"
date: 2022-09-11T00:40:03+01:00
draft: false
---
# ＂The faithful Servant's Holiness＂ - Titus 1_8
 A couple of years ago, my wife Vanessa gave me a job. She said, Mike, I need to sharpen the kitchen knives, go out and find a knife sharpener and get it done. And we were in seminary at the time, so the constraint was the budget. I had a very limited number of resources to commit to this very important task. So I did what I generally do and I got on the internet and spent much too much time finding the best possible knife sharpener I could find. I ordered it on Amazon and two days later it showed up in the mail and I opened the box and something wasn't quite right. Didn't look right. But I'm not a knife sharpening expert. I had seen the videos on YouTube, so I pulled out the knife sharpener and I took the first knife and I said, let's get to work. So I start sharpening and let me tell you this, whatever happened in that few minutes, I started with a knife and I did not finish with a knife. The edge was gone. It was now a expensive metal spatula. I had mangled this knife. I had ruined this tool that my wife needs to make me the delicious food I depend on. This was a crisis, right? So I get online and I'm trying to figure out what went wrong and what I realized as I looked at the pictures of what I had purchased and what I got is that I had been given a fake. I had been sold a lie, a counterfeit. What I had wasn't the real deal. Someone had taken the same outer casing and put in a faulty, cheap sharpening stone on the inside. So when I drew the blade across it, I was just destroying that knife. The seller made their money and I got nothing for it. In fact, I was left worse off than I started. Now you can imagine my outrage at this, but there was really nothing I could do and being in seminary, we just went on with that same knife and kept barely cutting through our food for years. Now I don't know about you. I don't know if you've noticed this, but it seems like the presence of these fake products is increasing. It seems like more and more often you buy something online and what gets delivered to you isn't what you expected. It's not what you planned on. And you may have noticed now that we actually start to look for some sort of seal of authenticity, some sort of mark by some third party that, yeah, this is a good product. This is the one you should get. This one's going to work unlike all those other ones. So we no longer have the standard that what we buy should work because we've paid for it. It now needs to be certified. Now it needs to be qualified. As it becomes easier and easier to fake things, whether it's a physical product or even worse, a digital product, we're more and more paranoid to make sure that we're getting the real deal, that we're getting the right thing and it's going to work. Okay, so we've been studying elder qualification for the past few weeks. We've been looking at Titus 1 and we've been examining God's standard for men who we hope would be the right man for the job. We've been mostly focusing on these external qualities, things that you could look at a person, look at their life and say, yeah, they seem to measure up. He's got a healthy marriage. He's got submissive children. He has self-control over his desires. He's not an obvious glutton or drunkard. He's generous. This man invites people into his home and gives from what he has. Now a lot of these things, if we're honest, they can be imitated. You could fake it. Now there are heart issues that we've examined each week, but the reality is that if you wanted to, you could read the qualifications we've read so far and you could fashion a personal identity that would seem to be qualified while your heart was not in the right place. You could make yourself a counterfeit. Now I hope you can see that if we're talking about the leadership of the church, there's nothing worse than unqualified men who are faking it. Now none of us, what are we going to do? Because none of us come with the seals of authenticity. None of us have been reviewed by a third party, right? How can we be sure that the men that we identify, that the people that we start to train for eldership and to take leadership over this church in the future, how can we be sure that they really are who they say they are? How are you going to do that? Well to be clear, there's no perfect answer. If you've been here through the study, you remember a few weeks ago that Tom warned us that the way God has designed the church is open to abuse and manipulation. It does happen. We need to submit to the word and act in faith. That doesn't mean we shouldn't try. That doesn't mean we shouldn't be hopeful that we can identify qualified men. And I want to give you good news because I think the final three terms we're going to study from Titus 1, 7 through 8, the ones that we're going to study today which are lover of good, upright, and holy, they tell us that when Paul was setting out his vision for qualified leadership in the church, he wasn't just thinking of externals. These terms are going to get into the heart of the faithful servant. And they're going to help us determine is this man really who he says he is. Because what we're going to see is that these three terms round out a picture of genuine biblical holiness. Holiness. This isn't the holiness of a Pharisee or a goody two shoes. This is the identification with, the commitment to, the devotion to God of a person who has been transformed by the gospel of Jesus Christ. Now, like I said, does this mean we can know for sure? No. Paul warns that there will be wolves within. But if we slow down and we carefully and graciously observe elders and elder candidates by these three attributes, we're going to be able to be confident and have faith that we've found men who are authentic. And if you aspire to eldership, I would argue that these are the core, the starting point. If you have this holiness, you can grow in the other areas. Now, final reminder that yes, we're talking about elders and that doesn't mean that if you're not planning on being an elder, you should tune out for this sermon. Okay? The elder is the faithful servant who has been elevated to the position of steward over God's household. We are all servants, so we are all expected to meet this standard, to aim for this goal. And we're going to see that throughout our study today. So yes, we should be looking for these proofs in the men who we appoint to eldership, but we should also be looking for them and we should start with looking at ourselves and our own hearts. So what's our big idea for today? Where are we going in the text? Well, in Titus 1, 7 through 8, we see three proofs of genuine holiness which every faithful servant must demonstrate. Three proofs of biblical, genuine holiness which every faithful servant must demonstrate. The first proof, the genuinely holy servant must love what is good. Must love what is good. Second proof, the genuinely holy servant must obey the word of God. And finally, the genuinely holy servant must be devoted to God. So let's dive in. Proof number one, the genuinely holy servant must love what is good. Listen to verses 7 and 8 of Titus chapter 1 again. Paul writes, for an overseer as God's steward must be above reproach. He must not be arrogant or quick tempered or a drunkard or violent or greedy for gain, but hospitable, a lover of good. Self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined. So first, let's look at this term lover of good. If you remember a few weeks ago, we looked at hospitality and hospitality was the lover of strangers. Well, right after hospitality, he says a lover of good. It's the same construction. So Paul is painting a picture of a man who loves the stranger and loves what is good. His eyes are open scanning, trying to find people and things that he can love. Now remember, we've said that we've seen a lot of external qualifications, but this one is the first one that starts to dig down into our hearts. This says that the external behavior of the elder qualified man, of the faithful servant, is motivated by a love for what is good. It's a genuine love that appreciates what is good, what is pure, what is holy. The faithful servant doesn't just do good. They love good. Now remember last week, Tom was teaching us about the rich man. Remember the rich man came to Jesus and was presenting himself to Jesus and Jesus was examining him, was rooting through his heart as he graciously does, and he asked the man what he thought of himself. And the man said, I am good. He believed that he was good. But what did Jesus' assessment reveal? Was the man really good? No. He was not a lover of good. He loved what made him feel good and look good. But he did not actually love what was good and because of that, he did not submit himself to Christ. Now, if you're like me, you don't want to end up in the same place. You don't want to think, I got this, I'm good, and find out when Jesus examines you that you don't love what is good. So I think if we can accept that the faithful servant of God loves what's good, it's our next task to figure out what that looks like. What is good and how do I love it? Do you agree? So what does scripture tell us? How does scripture help us understand loving what is good? There's a whole bunch of passages we could go to. I could keep you here until dinner time. But I'm going to suggest Philippians 4.8. Philippians 4.8, it's a simple single sentence that helps us understand what God expects. Listen to this. Philippians 4.8, finally brothers, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence, if there's anything worthy of praise, think about these things. Now if you've heard this verse before, if you've been in the church for a long time, it's an easy one to say, yeah, love that verse, wow, great, awesome. And then move on. But let me ask you this. Christian, does that verse describe you and did it describe you before Christ saved you? There's no possible way that it did. You cannot practice this verse in your sin. Listen to what Romans 1.18 tells you about what you think about. Romans 1.18, for the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men who by their unrighteousness suppress the truth. Before Christ saves you, you don't think on what's good. You hide from what's good. You suppress what is good. You put it away in a cupboard where you never have to see or think about it. And Jesus adds to this. In Mark 7, listen to what he says. He says, for from within, out of the heart of man come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery, coveting, wickedness, deceit, sensuality, envy, slander, pride, foolishness. All of these evil things come from within and they defile a person. That is who we are in our natural state. That describes the heart of man. We don't think on what is true and we don't love what is good or lovely or beautiful. So to be a lover of good, to have a thought life described by Philippians 4.8 is completely unnatural. Would you agree? It describes something impossible. Something that can only happen if something changes in you. In order to act differently, the Christian needs more than a radical makeover. They need a heart transplant. Now years ago when I was in seminary, I served in a ministry at a drug rehabilitation camp. This was a camp run by the California Department of Corrections. What they would do is they would take drug addicted criminals and they would bust them out to the middle of the California desert and put them in essentially a prison camp and tell them don't come out until you're not addicted to drugs. And they would do this for many men. There were hundreds of men and women in this camp. Now they didn't give them any money to do this and they didn't have a good philosophy. So it wasn't a very healthy place. The philosophy that they had for addiction recovery was this. Take that bad desire you have and substitute it for something less bad. We're going to put you in the desert. You don't have any access to your drugs. You don't have any access to your drug dealers. Now all of those highs that you're after, here are other things you could substitute. You could smoke cigarettes. You could get into movies. You could read a lot of books. You could play sports. You can cultivate friendships with other addicts. But hopefully you like good things more than bad things. So of course in this environment when the guys couldn't get access to what they wanted, they could substitute. Right? And they could get and feel clean. But as soon as they got back into the real world, they hadn't actually changed the desires of their heart. The affections were still the exact same. And so as soon as they had access again, they went right back to the thing that really fulfilled. The thing that really filled that hole in their life, in their heart. And it was only the men who were able to, whether by God's grace or by willpower, substitute a better love, a better affection, an affection for something more than simply their own pleasure who were able to get over their addiction. Now some of those men did with affection for God and for His word. Other men did for their family or for their work. But if you didn't get a new heart, a new love for something, you couldn't get out of that trap. Substituting didn't work. Well I think that many of us as Christians tend to do the same thing. We are born in sin. We are born in idolatry. And we become Christians or we think we become Christians. And we try to muscle our way out of our idolatry by swapping out lesser and lesser idols. Things that are less and less icky to us and to the world. You can replace the idol of sinful lust with the idol of self-righteousness. Which one looks better? Self-righteousness, right? You can look and act good but not because you love good. And that's the problem. That's what Paul is getting at. He's saying it's not enough to just look good, to be polished. You need to love what is good. Now only God truly knows the heart. That's for Him to see. But He wants you to genuinely love what is genuinely good. So when Paul tells you to be a lover of good, he is telling you to do something that you can see you cannot do without God changing your heart. So the elder qualified man, so the faithful servant of God will be a lover of good. How do you know if this is you? Right? I said let's start by examining ourselves. Examine yourself. How do you know if you are a lover of good? Well I think you should start by taking a passage like Philippians 4-8 and seeing if it describes your heart. Do you rebel against the truth or crave the truth? Do you rebel against the truth or rejoice in it? Do you ignore or deflect from what is honorable and righteous? Or are you earnestly seeking to live in conformity with the Word of God, to be transformed by His Word? Do you love the filth, sin, the pleasure of this world? Or do you crave what is pure and lovely and commendable? Do you celebrate and praise the sin of others or do you seek a higher aim? Now let me qualify all of these questions with the reminder, please take heart, the goal is not that you perfectly match this standard. The goal is that the direction of your soul is towards righteousness. You must be transformed. Now when we hear the term transformed, if you are like me you associate it with children's cartoons from the 90s where something immediately becomes something it wasn't. You press a button and boom it's something else. That is not the transformation that scripture speaks of. Paul speaks of transformation as a lifelong commitment to change, to grinding it out like a marathon. This is lifelong commitment to slow and steady conformity to the standards of Christ. So don't look at your heart right now, don't see the sin this week and panic. Look to see, has God shown faithfulness to make me something I wasn't? To transform my heart and my loves over time? Look at yourself three years ago, am I different now? Even just a little bit, am I seeing the work of God, the work that only He could do in my heart? What kind of transformation are you looking for? You are looking for these kinds of things. The old things that used to grip your heart, your old entertainments, your old hobbies, your old friends, do they no longer attract you in the same way? Do you find you desire different habits and different pastimes? You are not looking at yourself and saying why am I not perfect yet? You are looking at yourself and you are looking to see can I tell that God has been in my heart tweaking things, updating things, improving things with His grace? If you see that, praise the Lord, continue on. But you know that that transformation is not automatic, is it? You haven't just sat down for the last however many years that you have professed Christ and become a lover of good. So how do you cultivate that love? Maybe you have it a little bit but you want more, you want to increase ever more in the pursuit of this. So you go back to Philippians 4a, you go back to this precious verse and you see that it starts with your thinking. You don't become a lover of good by feeling your way there because you need to know what is good, to love what is good. Romans 12 too backs this up when Paul writes, do not be conformed to this world but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that by testing you may discern what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect. As you know, as your loves and affections and knowledge are transformed, you can start to take things and hold them up to the standard of God and test whether or not they are good. You have to learn to reshape your thinking. You have to understand why the things you used to love are not as lovely to you anymore. You have to see your sin in light of the goodness and grace of God. And what the goal is, is that you love what God loves. Did you know you can ask him for help with this? You can see the standard that God sets out, you can see where you fall short and you can cry out to the Lord and say, Lord help my love, help my heart, grow me in this pursuit. This is a life long process but the struggle is worth it. Killing the old passions and reshaping your affections with the help of God's Holy Spirit is a work which absolutely transforms your life and is absolutely worth the effort. But remember, the transformation must start with your heart. The faithful servant must live a life of biblical holiness. And the first proof that that holiness is genuine is that the faithful servant is a lover of what is good. But remember, we've been talking about how you could potentially fake obedience. Well you can also love something without really getting up and doing anything about it, right? You can aspire to what's good but be lazy and disobedient. It's not enough just to love what is good. Genuine love of what is good will lead to a commitment to doing what is good. Can you see that? And that's where we get our second proof of biblical holiness, proof number two, the genuinely holy servant must obey God's word. If we look back at Titus 1 in 7 and 8 it says, he must not be arrogant or quick tempered or a drunkard or violent or greedy for gain but hospitable, a lover of good, self controlled, upright, upright, holy, and disciplined. Now this term upright, you've seen it throughout your Bible, also translated as just or righteous. Depending on what it's talking about, it can just refer to someone being law abiding. It's the idea that there's a standard and you meet it. Someone who meets the standard, a law abiding citizen. But we're not talking about simply human laws in this context are we? We're talking about conformity to God's standard. So this is why we say righteousness, upright. This is someone who's not just obedient to the laws of man but someone who conforms to the standard that God has set. The faithful servant must obey the law of God. He must live according to God's standard. With this term Paul says the faithful servant is obedient to what God says. He's obedient to all of what God says. This term is helpful because up until now as I've said again and again we've talked about specific kinds of proofs that a man is qualified. Hospitality, not gluttonous, not violent. This term tells us he also just has to fulfill the whole law. He just has to actually be a godly man, a man of God's word. This term is a synonym of righteous because it describes someone who is faithful to do what God says. Now Peter summarizes this uprightness in 1 Peter 1 verses 14 through 16. Listen to what he says. As obedient children do not be conformed to the passions of your former ignorance where we were before Christ. But as he who called you is holy you also be holy in all your conduct. Since it is written you shall be holy for I am holy. So the standard is simple. Be as perfect as God. Be as perfect as God. Now if you know anything about God you know how terrifying that standard is. If I told my four year old, if he came to me and said dad I want to join the football club and I said you can join the club as soon as you are better than Ronaldo. That would be a pretty hopeless prospect right? Or if he said dad I want to play basketball I said okay go watch tape of Michael Jordan. Once you can dunk like him I'll let you join the team. What Peter is telling us here is infinitely higher than that standard. He's saying be like Jesus Christ. You know how hard it is to obey. You know how hard it is to be good. You know how often you fall short of what God expects of you. So to be holy are you saying Mike that you need to be a goody two shoes? No sinning. No messing up. No failure. Squeaky clean. But you know that that's impossible. You know that even when you do good there's a part of your heart, your lusts and your intentions that color that good, that stain it with the flesh right? So do we just soldier on? Do we just fail upwards? Is Paul really telling us that what the faithful servant needs to be is just like a Pharisee? Just fighting through the flesh and looking good enough, obeying all the rules. Yeah, we know that you're a sinner on the inside but as long as you look good on the outside you are upright. Of course not. Of course that's not what Paul's saying right? We're not to be externally righteous and spiritually full of dead man's bones. And Paul helps us understand this. He talks through this concept in Philippians chapter 3. So look for you to turn in your Bibles to Philippians 3. Look at what Paul tells us. What he tells us because he's writing Philippians 3 and he's writing to a church that has these people in it that are trying to get people to do more. Yeah, good you love Jesus, good you submit to him but also you should be able to show it with these external signs of obedience. Legalism. And Paul writes to them and he wants to make them wary of this kind of obedience. So listen to what he says in verse 4. Paul writes, though I myself have reason for confidence in the flesh also, if anyone thinks he has reason for confidence in the flesh, I have more. Circumcised on the eighth day of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews, as to the law of Pharisee, as to zeal a persecutor of the church, as to righteousness under the law, blameless. See Paul reminds the Philippians that if the standard is simply following the rules, simply doing what the law says, then he was the perfect example of righteousness. If upright in Titus 1a means obedient to the letter of the law, then Paul says, I am more qualified than anybody. I was blameless. Paul says that's not enough. Look at verse 7 of Philippians 3. But whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ. Indeed, I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish in order that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith, that I may know him and the power of his resurrection and may share in his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, that by any means possible I might attain the resurrection from the dead. See Paul says, yes I am blameless according to the law, but I take that blamelessness that I've earned and I throw it away. I exchange it for the righteousness of Christ. Paul more than anyone knew what it meant to be obedient to the law. If you struggle with legalism and you think I'm pretty good at this legalism stuff, you have no idea compared to our brother Paul, but he took all of that perfection that he had gained and he threw it in the rubbish bin because he saw Christ's righteousness and he wanted that. Why did he make that exchange? Because he saw that knowing Christ Jesus as Lord is worth more than anything else. He wanted to practice faith in God rather than faith in himself. He says by any means possible he wanted to attain resurrection and that's why he was such a faithful Pharisee. But he saw that his own efforts, his own desires, his own straining for righteousness was not sufficient. He was still falling short, but Christ did not fall short. Christ was truly righteous, sinless, perfect and obedient to the law without failure and in Christ Paul saw he could know eternal life. So Paul presents the model for upright, but it's not the Pharisee. He says just trust in Jesus. Relax in his righteousness. Sit back, job's done, just wait around for heaven. That's not quite what he says is it? It's not that easy is it? Is he saying that because he's now righteous he's perfect, job done, he just sits around and waits for heaven? Or is he saying that because we have the righteousness of Christ we don't need the word anymore? We've got it right? The job's done. He says we have attained it. Well Paul tells us in the very next verses that the Christian life is simple, but it's not easy. Look at verse 12. He says not that I have already obtained this, that is resurrection from the dead, or am already perfect, but I press on to make it my own. Because Christ Jesus has made me his own. Brothers, I do not consider that I have made it my own, but one thing I do, forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead, I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus. And then he says let those of us who are mature think this way, and if anything you think otherwise, God will reveal this also to you. Only let us hold true to what we have attained. Paul is not perfect. Paul is not done working. He says yes I have been justified, but now I have work to do. I need to conform myself to the image of Christ. Jesus made us his own, so now we make him our own. He describes this as pressing on, as straining, it's challenging, it's difficult work. This is labor, this is effort, because it's against what you naturally do, isn't it? But it's worth it because eternal life is secured. You have it. It's been attained. So Paul encourages us to work our hardest at the upward call of God in Christ Jesus. Now at the end of chapter 3, he's going to help us see how this plays out by contrasting this kind of life with the life of the legalist. So look at verse 17. He says, brothers, join in imitating me and keep your eyes on those who walk according to the example you have in us. So he's presented his model, right, to press on, to strain. He says imitate this. Then he says in verse 18, for many of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, walk as enemies of the cross of Christ. Now in the context he's speaking of those who force people to be legalistic. He says their end is destruction. Their God is their belly and they glory in their shame with their minds set on earthly things. And he says this in verse 20, but our citizenship is in heaven and from it we await a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will transform our lowly body to be like his glorious body by the power that enables him even to subject all things to himself. See Paul calls the Philippians to imitate his efforts because these enemies are enemies of true obedience. They want you to conform to the external rules and they reject the work of Jesus and want to replace it with their own efforts. Those who are upright, those who are faithful to Christ are what? Verse 20 says, citizens of heaven. Citizens. Now, my family's been here for almost a year, like 11 and a half months, and we're starting to figure out this whole England thing. Okay, we're learning. We've got the, I'm saying we're pretty close. For example, I now am almost certain I know when I'm supposed to say cheers. I'm like only like one, one or every three or four times do I make a fool of myself. I know how to say pram, trousers, that one got me into some trouble, and I know how to pronounce tomato correctly. Okay, so I'm, I'm fitting in. I even think the queen is pretty cool and I'm an American. Okay, so it's going well. This project of integration into the culture is going well. So once I've been here for a year, I think it's okay for me to start calling myself English. I think it's alright if people ask, I say yes, I am a citizen of England, of the United Kingdom. I think you would probably be offended if I did that, wouldn't you? I think that would be weird. It's going to take my family years to become truly a part of this culture. It's not easy. And we can fake it, and we can even fake it till we make it up till a point, but there's a point at which it becomes obvious that we're not from around here. We're still learning. But Paul says that right here in Philippians 3 20, that in Christ, I have a new citizenship immediately. Not after I've been a Christian for a certain number of years, not after I've passed a certain number of hurdles. It's not that I need to get a background check and prove that I can speak the language, right? The righteous servant has been given a new citizenship, a heavenly citizenship. And this means that the efforts for righteousness are based on what is real about him. It's what's real about you if you're a Christian. You're not trying to achieve heaven, Christian, because heaven has been given to you. It's yours. You're living out a new reality, that you are a citizen of heaven. And this is what motivates your efforts to obey. You got to live like what's real about you is real. And you do that in the power of Jesus Christ that is going to subject all things to himself and is going to make you new. When my son says, I want to join the team. This is like saying, they've already let you on the team. No tryouts. You're on now. You're terrible, so you're going to have to learn, but you don't learn to get on the team. You've been put on the team now. Play your heart out. Learn. So the upright Christian lives out their new identity in Christ faithfully. You have a new self, Christian. If you want to obey, your identity must be transformed. If you want to be righteous, you cannot do it without a new identity in Christ. Now let me speak for a minute to those of us in this room who have been raised in a Christian church or been raised in a religious home or just tend towards legalistic thinking. Now if you've grown up in the church, if you've grown up under the teaching of the word or if you've really tried to submit yourself to the truth, that's a huge blessing. But the danger is, especially if you were raised in it, you know how to fake it. You know what it looks like. You know what to say and what not to say. And you can trick others and you can trick yourself, but you cannot trick your God. Do not think that you can transform yourself. Do not think that you can give yourself a new citizenship. You can receive citizenship. You can be given a new identity and a new heart, but those are gifts that come from Him and Him alone. Stop trying, if this is you, to work yourself into that new identity. To work yourself into that citizenship. Cry out for regeneration, for forgiveness, and for righteousness. And start living a life of obedience that is based on the reality of His forgiveness, not your efforts. Because Paul doesn't want the servants of God to try to be good Pharisees. He doesn't want us to be self-righteousness. He's begging you to see, Christian, that only Christ's righteousness is sufficient. He wants you to cling to Him alone. The truly holy person lives a life of obedience that's motivated by thankfulness for the grace of God, not by their own efforts. So when God commands you to live holy, to be holy like He is, He's not doing so as an angry, vengeful, tyrant God. He's doing so as your gracious Savior who loves to help you become what He calls you to be. And we know this because of Jesus' words in Matthew 11, 28-30. Jesus says, come to me all who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart, and you will find rest for your souls, for my yoke is easy and my burden is light. See, the yoke, the burden of the legalist is not easy. It is not light. And if you have put that on your own shoulders, Jesus tells you, stop. Stop trying to make yourself righteous. Stop stumbling and crumpling under the weight of your attempts to make yourself something you can't. Jesus wants to take that burden. He wants to give you His yoke, which is a yoke of perfect righteousness and perfect holiness, but it's light because He achieved it. The command to be holy is a command to obey from a God who has made it possible to obey through His own blood. Isn't that precious? Are you starting to see how this biblical holiness is a lot more than just external rule following? We saw at starts. The first proof is a love of good, a genuine draw in your heart towards what is like God, towards what God loves. And that love motivates you, second, to obey God's word, to do as He says, not on your own strength, but by living out the new identity He's given you. But the third part might be the most crucial. It might be the most important. The third proof is this. The genuinely holy servant must be devoted to God. Now, if you look at Titus 1, 7 through 8, you'll see the final term that we are studying today is this. It says, but hospitable, a lover of good, self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined. Now, it's a synonym of upright, but holy here is something different. There's multiple words for holy in the New Testament, and this one refers specifically to the devotion of someone who is pursuing holiness. It's not just obedience, it's devotion. If lover of good describes someone whose affections are tuned to the Lord's frequency, and upright describes someone who lives to obey Christ because of their new identity, holy describes someone who is devoted to God, someone who loves God and seeks God's pleasure and God's glory above all other things. And we've seen that you need a new heart to love what is good. You need a new identity to obey. And here we'll see you need a new relationship to be devoted. You need a relationship with God. Now, this concept of devotion, we see this term servant that we've been using throughout Titus 1. We need to be devoted servants. A good servant finds their fulfillment and glory in the fulfillment and glory of the master. As Christians, we are God's servants, so we must be devoted to his glory. But this devotion, as we've seen with the other two terms, must be transformed. You already are devoted. You are born with a certain devotion, a certain commitment, a certain passion, but it's not for the right thing. We have a new identity in Christ. We are able to love what he loves and we're able to obey his law, but Romans 6 tells us about our relationship to God before he saves us. Look at Romans 6, starting in verse 16. Paul says, do you not know that if you present yourselves to anyone as obedient slaves, you are slaves of the one whom you obey, either of sin, which leads to death, or of obedience, which leads to righteousness? See, Paul tells us it's simple. You're either a slave to sin or you're a slave to righteousness. You cannot be both. And our devotion is fully turned towards one of those two things. You can be devoted to sin, you can be devoted to rebellion against God, or you can be devoted to obedience. Now Christian, you were devoted to sin. The entire motive of your heart was in rejection of God and his truth. We've seen that in our study today. An unbeliever, if you are not yet saved, you are still ultimately devoted to sin. You need a new devotion. You need a new commitment. And look at verse 17, because this is where we see it, Romans 6, 17, but thanks be to God that you who were once slaves of sin have become obedient from the heart to the standard of teaching to which you were committed, and having been set free from sin, have become slaves of righteousness. See, the glory of the gospel is the fact that when God rescues you, he releases you from slavery to sin. He takes away that default commitment you have to sinfulness. You're now free to be obedient, but notice that he didn't buy out your contract. You're not a free agent. You're something different. He saved you, Christian, to a new slavery. You are still a slave. You have been purchased. Verse 19 helps us see this. Paul says, I am speaking in human terms because of your natural limitations. For just as you once presented your members as slaves to impurity and lawlessness, leading to more lawlessness, now present your members as slaves to righteousness, leading to sanctification. See as slaves of righteousness, as slaves of God, we take ourselves and we present them to God for him to use for his glory. As part of your transformed identity, you can now be devoted to God. You can be slaves to him and to obedience rather than slaves to yourself and your sin. If you're in this room and you're a slave to your sin, I'm telling you that there's a slavery, there's a freedom in chasing after and pursuing obedience. As a faithful slave of God, you do everything that you can to obey his will. You live to serve him, to please him, to honor him, because that's what a faithful servant does, right? And for a faithful servant, this obedience is not drudgery. It might be painful, it might be difficult, but it's not unpleasant. It's actually joyful. The faithful servant is marked by a wholehearted devotion to his or her master. Again, we've spoken about how these last few qualifications get at the heart motive. You can be an obedient slave, hear me, and not be devoted to the master. You can do what's right while in your heart you're not interested in God, right? You can follow the rules and not be filled with love, but the faithful servant loves God himself, devotedly and humbly, as a faithful slave. The passage which comes to mind when thinking of this kind of devotion is Psalm 37. Tom read that earlier, and if I could, I would take you through the whole chapter. But I just want to focus on a couple of passages. Listen to verses three and four again. The psalmist says, trust in the Lord and do good. Dwell in the land and befriend faithfulness. And these famous words, delight yourself in the Lord and he will give you the desires of your heart. The faithful servant is delighted in God himself and who God is. This is a relational love. Now he's not in love just with the benefits of being God's servant, but he's in love with God. He's delighted in God himself and who God is. And the result of that delight is that over time the servant's desires become God's desires. That's why your desires will be given to you when you delight in God, because you will actually conform to what he wants. But notice what comes in the next verses, verses five and six. Commit your way to the Lord, trust in him, and he will act. He will bring forth your righteousness as the light and your justice as the new day. And if you keep reading through Psalm 37, what you see is that this is not a one directional relationship. You are not in a relationship with God where you simply give love up and it's just absorbed. No, it is given back. And in fact it was given to you first, Christian. Amen? God is devoted to his people. He gives us the love that he expects us to give in return. He proved this when he sent his son to die for us. And he pictures this in the picture that the Bible shows us of marriage. In a healthy marriage there is a mutual commitment to the other person's best interest. A married person is dedicated to seeing their spouse thrive and grow and prosper at whatever cost and whatever situation. There are personal pleasures and benefits for marriage, but those aren't for personal gain. That's not the motive. That's the context of sacrificial devotion to the other person. Where do we see that most perfectly? In what God did when he sent Jesus Christ to save his people. Do you see why God illustrates his relationship with us in this picture of marriage? Just as a faithful husband is devoted to protecting and providing for and cherishing his wife, so God is to his people. And so the love that we give to him is love that we've received. We're not loving a distant removed deity with no interest in us. You Christian love a God who loved you first with perfect, devoted, compassionate, sacrificial love. And that's why our love is transformed. That's why our devotion is transformed when God saves us. Do you see how transformed devotion leads to holiness? When you are devoted to your sin, what does it yield? It says in Romans 6, it leads to more sin. But devotion to God leads to sanctification, to righteousness, because you are trying to be like your Savior, like this God who has instilled a relationship with you. Now it's my conviction that this is the most challenging, the most difficult of the three attributes that we've studied today to grow in and to be faithful in. We are talking about a relational closeness, intimacy, and love that is radically committed to a God that you know you can't see. I know that in my heart, and maybe this is the case for you, it's very easy for my devotion to look a lot less fervent or heartfelt than I wish it did. I know how to do the right thing, but am I doing it because I love the God I serve? The Pharisee doesn't have this devotion, the legalist, neither does the person who believes that they can live in light of grace without submitting to God's law. So how are you going to grow in your devotion to God? How do we become more devoted? Well, it's a relationship. How do you grow in any relationship? How do you become more devoted to someone? First, you need to know that person. If you want to love someone, you need to know them. Now the beauty of loving and getting to know God is you're not going to find something about him that's repulsive and horrifying because he is perfectly good. So the more you know about him, the more you will be drawn to him, the more you will want to know. As you study his word, as you see his self-revelation, you will appreciate him more. So you need to know God if you want to be devoted to him. But second, you need to speak to him. You can't have a relationship with someone if you never speak to them. If someone comes to you and says, oh yeah, I've got a girlfriend, you say, oh wow, what's her name? I don't really know, we don't really talk, I see her around, but this person is weird. But that's what so many of us do with God. How often are you speaking to your Savior? What does your prayer life look like? You need to speak to him. As you speak to him, as I said before, you need to beg him to draw you to him. Lord, help me. Help me know you. Do you remember the story in Mark 9 of the father who needed his son healed and Jesus says, well do you not believe that I can do this? And he says what? He says, I believe. Help my unbelief. He's saying, as much as I can, but I know I don't enough. You say, Lord, I love you, help my love. If you want to grow in this, here's another helpful thing you can do. Remember, Paul said in Philippians 3, imitate my example. Who are the people in your life who you can see are devoted to God? You can see that they are loving him at a level that you're not yet. Get to know them. Shamelessly imitate them as they imitate Christ. What do you do? How do you do it? Now don't become a legalist. Don't become a Pharisee under the church of so and so other person, but get to know them. Imitate the things that they do that draw them to God. Understand what it is about God that causes them to love him and practice that. And you can do this even if you don't know someone personally here. You should know people in the church, but you can also look at church history. You can look at the people throughout the history of God's goodness who have practiced devotion and you can find ways to imitate them. This is a worthwhile cause. You should be devoted to God. Devotion is the third proof of genuine holiness. So we've seen these three terms. The faithful servant must love what is good. The faithful servant must obey God's word, the faithful servant must love God personally, must be devoted to him. And I hope it's clear that as you see these three proofs and as we've unpacked them, you can see that you can only do this with the help of God. To love what is good, you must have a new heart. To obey God's word, you must have a new identity and to be devoted to God, you must have a new relationship. This tells us that ultimately, genuine biblical holiness comes as a result. It requires gospel transformation. As we highlighted throughout this sermon, you did not start this way. We are not naturally holy. You and I, we were all born in sin. We were committed to our own glory and if you stay in this state, you will never be holy. You will not love what is good. You will not be upright. You will not be devoted to God. So if you want to be a faithful servant of God, it starts with the good news of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Because unlike you and I, Jesus was a perfect lover of good. He was upright. He never sinned. And he was devoted to his Father. This means that when he died, his death was a sufficient sacrifice. He was a spotless lamb who could take on himself the sins of his people. The resurrected Son of God defeated Satan's sin and death and he wants your devotion, your obedience, and he wants you to imitate his love. He wants to make you new. Now don't get these steps out of order, friends. If you try to pursue these things without having a new heart, without being transformed by Christ, you will only end in legalism. You must be born again. You must be transformed by Jesus before you can become like Jesus. So where do you start? What do you do next? You start with repentance. You need to acknowledge the fact that you are not holy. You need to acknowledge the fact that you have not been transformed. I need to beg the God of the universe to transform your heart. And then you begin this relationship as a faithful, dedicated, devoted servant. If you want to honor your Savior with a life of faithful servitude, you cannot do it without his help. And he can and he will and he loves to transform his people. As we've seen throughout our study of these verses in Titus, the gospel is the means by which we become faithful servants. And so transformational biblical holiness is what makes a man qualified for eldership in the church. Remember that's what we're doing. We're trying to study this concept of eldership. Now does this mean that we know without a doubt that our elders are holy, that we've got it? Because we can take these terms and we can nitpick in their lives and be certain? Well, no. We've said that clearly. We still need to trust God. There will still be wolves. But when we see evidence of biblical holiness, true devotion, committed obedience, and a love of what is genuinely good, we see the signs that that external obedience is more than skin deep. But this is a person who is genuinely committed to the glory of God. So please pray for this church. Pray for us as we try to find these men, try to equip them. When we nominate candidates, these men are going to be under real scrutiny. We're going to be testing them by these verses. Your elders were already elders. We are testing ourselves by these qualifications because we want to protect our church from nominating the wrong men. And we want to protect these men from being put in a position they shouldn't be. We're not just checking boxes of external obedience. We are digging into the souls of these men and ourselves. So it's difficult and it hurts, but it's absolutely worth it. So please pray for our church as we do this. But please remember, you need to be this yourself. Even if you'll never be an elder, this is the goal for the faithful Christian. The faithful steward lives a life transformed by God's grace. Faithful in practicing the discipline necessary to conform your life to God's standard. This can only be achieved by the help of God's Holy Spirit. This can only be done in you with the help of the God who saves you. So yeah, pray for our church. Pray for us as we try to find these men. But let's pray for ourselves right now. Let's pray that God would make us faithful servants. Will you do that with me? God, thank you for this standard. This standard that makes it so clear that if we want to honor you, we need your help. No one will enter heaven by their own strength. No one will see the kingdom by their own efforts and their own holiness. We need the righteousness of your son. We ask that you would be gracious to give it to us. I pray for the men and women in this room who have not yet been rescued by you, who are still in a state of sin, who still love what is evil, who are not upright, who are not devoted to you. Rescue them. Help them to see how desperately they need your Spirit and how joyful it will be to pursue righteousness with the help of the righteous Savior, with the promise that your righteousness has finished the work that we pursue. I pray for those of us in this room who are legalists, who want to add rules, who want to work out our own salvation even as Christians, Lord, humble us. Help us to love your grace that gives us new life purely and entirely because of what you have done and not because of us, in spite of us. Thank you for doing that work. Thank you for rescuing your people. Bless this church as we try to grow, as we try to grow in righteousness, as faithful servants, as we try to appoint stewards in the years ahead, Lord, protect us and grow us in the power of your Spirit and for your glory. We pray these things. Amen.