---
title: Distinctives of a Fully-Functioning Church, Part 3 - 1 Thessalonians 5:19-22
date: 23-06-13
draft: false
---
So today we're continuing the series that we've been in in First Thessalonians 5. It's been sort of a scattershot series. We started it last month and then we had the Preach London Conference, so we took a little break. But we're back in First Thessalonians. The letter of First Thessalonians was written by Paul to a church that he had founded in Thessalonica, which is in modern-day Greece. Now this church was filled with new immature believers. And that's because Paul hadn't been able to instruct them how he would have liked to. 

If you're familiar with Acts and with the New Testament, you know that in some of the churches he planted, he had years to stay and to train the people to understand the word of God. But in Thessalonica, almost as soon as he had planted the church, he was chased out of the city by the enemies of the church. And so he had fled with his missionary team and later was able to send his spiritual son Timothy back. He said, Timothy, go see how they're doing. And Timothy returned and said, Paul, they're doing well. They need some counsel. So Paul took out his pen or got his buddy who had a pen, however he did it. 

And he wrote this letter to this young baby immature church. So at first he encourages them and then he gives them some instruction on different issues they were dealing with. But then the conclusion, which is where we're studying, is this sort of rapid fire series of brief commands. And you can imagine if you think back to when you went to university, the first time you call your mom, right? And as you're ending the phone call, she's saying, okay, eat healthy food. Don't talk to strangers. Go to bed on time. Brush your teeth. 

All right, this short little, all the things she forgot to say in the midst of the two and a half hour phone call, right? She needs to get it all in at the end. Now if she's trained you well, she's telling you things you already know and hopefully things you're already doing. These are the basics. But in the case of this church that we're talking about, Paul hadn't gotten to explain these things. So while we see these things and you might be tempted to just breeze through these short little sentences, these are important foundational things that Paul wants this church to put into practice. See, with these commands, Paul is outlining a blueprint for a well-run fully functioning church. So what we've been doing in this series is studying those blueprints, trying to catch Paul's vision for what a fully functioning church should look like. 

If you remember when we started with Adam, he said that a fully functioning church lives in light of God's authority and they do this by honoring the work of the leaders. And a fully functioning church lives in light of God's love by helping and serving and caring for the spiritually needy. And then we saw that a fully functioning church lives in light of God's grace. When people in the church are attacked or hurt by one another or by people outside of the church, we don't retaliate. We don't hit back. Instead, we seek to love. And finally, we've seen that the fully functioning church is living in light of God's sovereignty, actively believing that God is good and in control, and this results in lives of constant worship and prayer and thankfulness. 

And today, we're going to come to the last few commands. So we've seen this blueprints. We've seen this really clear structure and vision that Paul has for the church. The purpose of this vision is so that what we say we believe when we present the gospel is demonstrated by the way we live. We don't want to have skin deep faith. We want to have transformative faith that demonstrates itself in our walk and in our talk. And you can see that Paul's vision demonstrates transformative faith. 

These commands are countercultural and they're counterintuitive. It's obvious that if we're going to be a fully functioning church, we're up for a really difficult work. But in these last few commands, Paul is shifting his focus a little bit. What he's doing here is he's looking to help us see how we are going to accomplish this transformation. If we can't accomplish this building on our own, if you can't start living in light of God's authority and love and grace and sovereignty by your own strength, you're going to need help. And Paul knows that and the beautiful truth that Paul wants us to remember is that we are not alone. We're not accomplishing these things by our own strength. 

See, if we've seen the blueprints the last few weeks, now we're shifting to the project manager, the site manager, the person overseeing the building of this church. Who's in charge of the operation? Who's making sure things go according to plan? Who is helping you and I accomplish these goals? Now the answer, of course, is God, but it's specifically God, the Holy Spirit. And Paul is telling us in these verses that if you and I want to be a part of a faithful, fully functioning church, we need to work with the Holy Spirit and not against Him. And he explains that we do this well when we pay particular attention to knowing and discerning the will of God. So today here's our big idea. In 1 Thessalonians 5, 19 through 22, these few verses we see that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit. We live in light of God's Spirit. 

Now we do that in three ways from the text. So if you're writing this down, you want to get a little outline going. There's three ways that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit. We live in light of God's Spirit first by participating in His work. Now so we'll see in verse 19. We participate in His work and we treasure His Word. Now so we'll see in verse 20. 

And finally, we live in light of God's Spirit by discerning His will. We'll see that in verses 21 and 22. We participate in His work. We treasure His Word and we discern His will. So let's start with our first point. The fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit by participating in His work. Look at verse 19. 

It says, do not quench the Spirit. Paul starts with this general command. He just says, don't quench the Spirit. Now what does he mean by this? Well, it's a quench is to extinguish, to turn off, to stop the flow. Now you might be thinking of quenches like quenching your thirst. But the analogy there is actually that your thirst is a burning need that you quench by drinking something. Right? Now in this case, we're talking about putting out a fire. 

We're talking about cutting off the heat, the flame, the light of the work of the Holy Spirit. Now hopefully you have your theology hats on because Paul just told us not to turn off, not to stop the Holy Spirit. If you've got your theology hat on, you're saying hold on, Mike. We can't turn God off. We can't turn off the Holy Spirit. We can't extinguish God, right? Right? Okay, okay. Exactly. 

Whew. It's going to be a whole different sermon. God can't be stopped. In fact, in Deuteronomy 4, he calls himself a consuming fire. God is not a tiny candle that you out, right? God's more like a flame thrower. Right? If you try to blow out a flame thrower, you're going to be in big trouble. We cannot quench the Spirit himself. 

That's not possible. So, what is Paul saying when he tells us not to quench the Spirit? What does he mean? Well, what he means is that we must not interrupt, slow down or halt the Spirit's work. Let me say that again. To quench the Spirit is to interrupt, to slow down or to halt the work of the Spirit. Now, let's think about that for a minute. The Bible tells us that unbelievers resist the Holy Spirit. In Acts 7. 

51, Stephen accuses the Jewish authorities and he says, you stiff-necked people, uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit as your fathers did, so do you. Now, this points to a mystery about the work of God because God always accomplishes His purposes. He always brings to pass what He intends, but yet there's some way in which we are able to resist and to push back and to fight that work. God will save who He intends to save, but that doesn't mean we aren't responsible for resisting, for fighting against that work. And that's true in the hearts of unbelievers when the Spirit is working to save, but it's the same in us, in Christians, because now that we are saved, the Holy Spirit is working to sanctify us. He's working to make us new, to turn us in to the image of Christ. And Jesus promised He will build His church, right? But in our sin, in our folly, in our weakness, we can slow down the process. 

We can resist the work of the Holy Spirit, not in the same way that unbeliever resists, but that's where Paul gets this idea of quenching. If there's a flame burning in us as Christians, the flame of the Holy Spirit, we can deaden the flame. We can make it weak. Go back to our building metaphor. You could be the best site manager, the best general contractor in the world, but if your team of subcontractors and employees aren't good, your work is only going to progress so quickly. Now taking another analogy, if you're a mom at home and it's time to clean the house, you have a decision to make. You can say, I can take 10 minutes and clean the whole house myself, get it just how I like it, and it's good to go. 

Or I can take three and a half hours and have my kids do it, right? And I can walk around with them and teach them how to do it and correct everything they do wrong. And the finished product will not be as good. I will be tired and they will be probably disciplined multiple times in the process, right? That's the decision you get to make as a mom, as a parent on a regular basis. And through the training, you're through this process, you are building up your children, you're teaching them what it means to take responsibility, you're blessing them, you're developing them. That's what the Holy Spirit is doing with us. You see, he could sanctify us in a moment. He could build his church to completion in a second. 

He could save everyone he intends to save, right? This moment, but he is chosen in his providence, in his perfect will, to work through us. And the bummer news about that is that in our analogy, we are the slacking employee. We are the child who doesn't do the work well. We don't know what we're doing. And that's the beautiful irony of the work of the Spirit, is that we are the weakest link in God's work, you and I, Christian. But God delights to use us. Quenching the Spirit has nothing to do with his ability. 

It has everything to do with our responsibility. See, he is capable, but he's working on a team and he's stuck with you and me as teammates. And that's why Paul gives you and I, Christian, this warning. That's why he tells us not to quench the Spirit. We cannot quench the Spirit because the Spirit has work he intends to do in our hearts and through our hands. And we don't want to slow that work down. We're responsible. 

When we quench the Spirit, we aren't working with him. We aren't participating in what he's accomplishing. Instead, we're interrupting. We're slowing down. We're stopping or misdirecting what he's trying to accomplish. And Paul says that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit by working with him, by participating in his work, rather than working against him. Quenching the Spirit isn't participating. 

What does this look like? How do you quench the Spirit? If you were to say, okay, I see that. I don't want to do that. Well, if the work of the Spirit is to sanctify you and to make you fit for service, to put you into work in the church and in the world, then you can ask this question, what am I doing? That interrupts, stops or slows down my sanctification or my service. What are the habits, decisions, and patterns in my life that demonstrate that I am slow and down, that I am interrupting the sanctifying work and the service that the Spirit intends to use me for? This could be sin. This could be bad habits. This could be the weights that cling so closely to us. So here's a series of questions to consider. 

If the Holy Spirit works through the Bible to convict us of sin and lead us to repentance, you should ask yourself. When you're convicted about sin, do you do anything about it? When you feel that moment where the Spirit is saying what you're hearing from the word is something you're not doing, do you slam on the brakes? Do you slow down and consider that? Or do you do everything you can to get out of that moment of conviction as fast as you can? If you're not diligent in your fight against sin, you're quenching the Spirit. You're not allowing him to sanctify you. The Holy Spirit works through the blessings of other believers to help us be encouraged and to give us opportunities to serve and even to hold one another accountable and to bring that conviction, right? So let me ask you this. Are you faithfully participating in fellowship in the church? If God has saved you to fellowship with Him and with His people, has saved you to be a minister to the people in this church, are you faithful to be here, to be present, to be active in loving others? Is church an opportunity for you to come and get help or for you to come and help? If you're not fellowshiping faithfully, you're quenching the Spirit. The Holy Spirit works through us to speak truth, the truth of the gospel to unbelievers and the truth of the gospel to one another, right? The truth that we need to conform ourselves to the image of Christ and be transformed. Are you Christian speaking the truth? When the moment comes where your brother or sister needs that word of encouragement or exhortation, do you flinch? Do you hold back? When your unbelieving friend gives you a clear wide open door for the gospel, do you hold back or do you dive in? Are you not saying are you afraid or not? I'm saying are you faithful or not? When we aren't speaking the truth, we're quenching the Spirit. 

These are just a few examples. We can explore what God says about the Spirit and see a myriad of ways that He works. And anytime we see that He's trying to accomplish something, if we're not working with Him, then we're quenching His work. So if you aren't doing these things, if you aren't participating in fellowship and fighting sin and speaking truth, you're quenching the Spirit. The reality is that this is the way we all work naturally. Your natural tendency is to quench the Spirit, Christian. You can't be passive and obey this command. 

To obey this command is to overcome what you would naturally normally do so that you can be faithful to participate in the work of the Spirit. Do you see that? Rather than quench the Spirit, 2 Timothy 1 6 tells us to fan into flame the gift of God. The same analogy. Rather than put it out, we build it up. So this is really practical stuff. And if you know me, you know that what I would like to do is spend another 20 minutes talking about how to apply this. But we need to cover more ground. 

So in your fellowship group this week, I want you to go and I want you to intend to really sit down and think about what is the work of the Spirit? What does He intend to do in me and how am I participating in that work or not? It's going to be a great opportunity for us as a church to help one another think about this, okay? But before we continue, before we look at the next verses, I want to add this warning. See some of you are listening to me right now and I'm talking about not quenching the Spirit. I'm teaching you from Scripture what the Bible says about how we participate in the work of the Spirit. But here's my concern for you. You can't quench the Spirit if He's not in you. There's nothing to quench. And for some of you in this room, that's the case. 

Some of you have no Spirit within you who is working for you to stop. Now this sermon is intended to feed God's sheep. My intention is to help Christians understand how to obey. But if you're in this room and you're not a Christian, I don't want to overlook you. Because if you're not a Christian, there's no Spirit in you working. There's no fire to put out because you are an empty lantern. No instead that God says before you're saved, you're not in danger of quenching Him, right? You're in danger of resisting Him. 

And if you're not saved, you are resisting Him. You are pushing back against His work. You are living in a self spun cocoon of lies and comforting deception. That's what you're doing. And the truth is that only the truth, only the work of the Spirit can set you free from that. The word resist pictures someone who is in a hospital and has all the care that they need provided and they're saying, no, thank you. No, I don't want it. 

The treatment is there, the cure is there, the help is there, and they're saying, leave me alone. See, the beauty of the work of the Spirit is that He has the answer, He has the solution, and He desires to give it to you. And that's why resisting His work is such a bad idea. You see, in your sin you have exactly one thing awaiting you, judgment. And when I say judgment, what I mean is the wrath of the God who created you will be turned on you if you do not repent. All the power that He used to create you and to form you and to place you in this world will be turned against you. This wrath takes the form of a real place, a place that we call hell. 

And those who deny God, those who resist the Spirit, that is what awaits them. That is the only thing that they know for certain is that they will die and they will face that wrath. And that wrath is totally fair and totally deserved because of your sin. You see, you and I are sinners. We are naturally, we rebel against our Maker. We hate Him and we want to be our own God. We are consciously deciding to go against the purpose He has made us for. 

If you are not a believer, you are living for your own glory, which is the opposite of what you were made to do. You are an image bearer. You are a precious picture of God for this earth to see. And when you live for Him, you glorify Him. Friend, you cannot do that if you do not repent. You cannot do that if you do not give up your sin. If you have a pulse, you are a sinner. 

If you are a sinner, you are in grave danger. But the beauty is that the Spirit knows that and He loves you and He desires to rescue you from that danger. He proclaims the gospel. He empowers the sharing of the truth that Jesus Christ loved you enough in your sin to take the penalty you deserve for your sin. He did not just come and act as a good teacher and give us some fun ideas to think about. He came and He lived a perfect life so that He could step into your place and pay the penalty that you deserve to pay. That is what the Spirit proclaims in the Word and through us believers. 

And that is what He is proclaiming to you right now through me. And I am praying that He is active to convict and to humble you so that you can hear the truth and not face the wrath that you deserve. Jesus died so that this wrath that you and I are meant to experience we can be freed from. And that is the beauty of the gospel. That is the beauty that we as Christians have to celebrate again and again and again. And that is what we are going to do after this service when we have the Lord's table. We are going to remember, we are going to reflect on the fact that Jesus paid it all. 

He paid it all. We have to celebrate that and I don't want you to be missing out on that celebration. I don't want you to be out of the love of God. I want you to know it. I want you to know that the Lord loves you enough to die for you and that we love you enough to tell you the truth to say that you are in danger. So unbeliever please, I ask you, stop and consider. You need to think right now. 

Am I resisting the Holy Spirit? You need to think about this even if you have grown up in the church, even if you have a testimony that you feel is sound. If you see that it is not that you are quenching the Spirit but you are resisting Him. You are not interested in the work He is doing. You are pushing against it. You need to repent. That is the only thing you need to worry about. Don't worry about quenching. 

worry about repenting. Empty that your sin is your greatest issue and that only Jesus can help you. Cry out to Him. Ask Him to save you. To give you a new heart He delights to do so and then and only then will He give you the gift of the Spirit. And then you begin a life where you are working with Him. You are participating with Him. 

You are included in the work that He is doing to build His church and to love His people and to glorify Christ. If you want to be a part of a fully functioning church it starts by having the Spirit in you. That is what we all need. A fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit by participating in His work. Rather than interrupting or stopping or slowing down His work we are participating in it with all of our hearts. So if we are going to do that, if you and I are going to be faithful to do that we need to ask the next question. What do we do? If we are going to work with the Spirit what does that look like? If we want to do this faithfully we need to know what God expects. 

We need to have a clear idea of what He has commanded us to do. That brings us to our second point because if we are going to live in light of the Spirit by participating in His work then we need to know and treasure the Spirit's Word. And that is what we see in verse 20. Verse 20 says simply do not despise prophecies. Now to despise is to treat as useless or unnecessary. And this is what most husbands do when they get that Ikea wardrobe home from the warehouse. They pull out the instructions, they look at the parts and say I think I can handle this. 

Take the instructions, set them aside, get to work about halfway through six hours later. The wife comes in and says how's it going? It's fine. Right? They are not valuing the very thing that was given to help them accomplish their goals. Maybe you are really good at following Ikea directions but this is something that we are all given to doing. Paul doesn't want us to treat prophecies the same way. Now when he says prophecies he is using a word which we could translate prophetic utterances. Now this is a term which refers to a direct communication from God to His people. 

Back in the Old Testament whenever a prophet would say thus say it the Lord whatever comes next is that prophetic utterance. Paul doesn't want the Thessalonians to ignore or downplay or write off the revealed word of God. Now it's going to be important for us to understand why he is saying this to the Thessalonians because remember this is a command that is coming in a context. It seems sort of divorced from it because it's so short but why is Paul saying this to the Thessalonians right here? Well you see unlike you and I the Thessalonians didn't have the New Testament. They didn't have this part of the Bible. In fact first Thessalonians is one of the very first letters of the New Testament that was written. This is very early on in the written communication for the church. 

So they didn't have what you and I have. They didn't have the written text of Scripture in the New Testament that you and I have today. But this doesn't mean that they were helpless. So God still provided for the Thessalonians. He gave them three things. They had the Scriptures which was the Old Testament, the Jewish Bible, the original revealed word of God that had been collected and preserved by His people up until the time of Christ. And then they had teaching that they had received from Paul and his team. 

It was brief, it was short but they had enough of the gospel to believe it and to love it and to be faithfully trying to live it. And finally they had prophecies from prophets within the church. It was the third way that God gave them instruction. Now Paul explains the role of the Christian prophet in Ephesians 2, 19 through 22. He says, so then you are no longer strangers and aliens but you are fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God. Built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets. Christ Jesus himself being the cornerstone in which the whole structure being joined together grows into a holy temple in the Lord. 

In him you are also being built together into a dwelling place for God by the Spirit. So in Paul's metaphor, the foundation of the church is the revealed word of God through the testimony of Christ, the apostles and the prophets. Do you see that? So the prophets and apostles communicated God's revelation to His people since there is no authoritative finished work of God yet, this word that is yet collected. So these two offices are incredibly important for the early church. Now Paul tells the Thessalonians don't despise this and you might be saying, well if it's that important, why would he need to tell them this? Why would they despise these precious words? Well this command is a direct implication of the command not to quench the Spirit. If the Thessalonians want to be a fully functioning church that's participating in the work of the Spirit, they need to treasure the word of God. So Paul is drawing the implication, but ignoring the word of God is actually the easiest way for them to quench the Spirit, right? But he says, do not quench the Spirit, the next thought is that means you need to treasure the word. 

For the Thessalonians, prophetic utterances were one of the primary means of the word of God. It was one of the primary ways they got that word. Now we don't know, maybe the Thessalonians were nervous about prophecy. Maybe they had seen it done poorly and the leaders had said, you know what, let's just not do this whole thing, we'll stick with what Paul gave us. Maybe they really liked Paul's words and they just kind of wanted to stick with what he had said, all right? Now maybe there were people there who were prophesying and it wasn't going well and so they had just said, we're not doing this. But those issues aren't good reasons for them to cut off, cut themselves off from God's revelation to them. Paul is saying, if you don't want to quench the Spirit, you need to know God's word and you need to treasure it. 

And if he's giving it to you in these prophecies, you better not set them aside. Does that make sense? So Paul commands the Thessalonians to value this prophecy as one of the means by which they're going to know how to participate in God's word and God's work. Okay, so you're saying, thank you for the history lesson, Mike. Got it. I am not a Thessalonian. This is London. I have a Bible and I don't think I despise it. 

So what's the point? Right? What's the use of this command for me? Well thank you for asking. Let me tell you. See, for us, the same principle applies. Christian, if you want to not quench the Spirit, you need to live by the word of God. If you want to not quench the Spirit, you need to treasure rather than despise the word of God. For you, the word of God is in a different form than it was for the Christians at Thessalonica. You've got the Old Testament and the New Testament here. 

If you don't live by this word, you're despising prophecies. If you don't live by this word, you're quenching the Spirit. Guarantee. It's that easy. And that means that if you don't live by this word, you cannot participate in the work of a fully functioning church. Because you won't be living by God's love or his authority or his grace or sovereignty. You won't be putting yourself under his revelation of those things. 

Does that make sense? Here's the deal. Second Timothy 3, 16 through 17 tells us, all Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for proof, for correction, and for training in righteousness that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work. We have everything we need. God says through the Scripture. So if we don't think about the word of God that way, if we don't treasure it as that sufficient source of who God is and what he expects, we're despising his revelation. We're not treasuring his word. Now all this talk about despising prophecy has been dancing around an interesting issue that we can't ignore. 

You see, at Grace Life London, we teach that the gift of prophecy is no longer active today. We teach that this gift of prophecy is not meant to occur in the church in this time. That's because we believe the Bible teaches something we call cessationism, to cease the ceasing of these gifts, which teaches that some of the gifts of the Spirit were for that apostolic age when God was setting the foundation of the church's built upon. So we call ourselves cessationists. Now the other side of this issue, call themselves continuationists. If we're saying the gifts have ceased, they're saying they continue. The continuationists say that these gifts are still active in the church. 

So when it comes to sign gifts like miracle working, healing, prophecy and tongues, there's two sides. Continuationists who say those gifts are still necessary and active today. And the cessationists who say those were for a specific purpose which God has fulfilled. So here's the problem. What we are essentially saying is, okay, don't despise prophecies, but don't prophesy. Is that consistent? If we don't believe that the gift of prophecy is active today, right now, are we despising prophecies? Some would say we are. So we need to answer that. 

And here's my answer. No. All right, that's it. How just kidding. No, believing that the gift of prophecy is no longer active is not despising prophecies. Okay? Why do I say that? Well, let me define my terms and then we can think about this together. When I say gift of prophecy, here's what I mean. 

I stole this from somebody. The divine enabling of receiving and communicating direct verbal communication from God to man. Let me say that again. The divine enabling of, enabling of receiving and communicating direct verbal revelation from God to man. If you remember, in the past, Thomas talked about the priest faces God and speaks for man. The prophet faces man and speaks for God. The prophet is God's mouthpiece. 

The prophecy is a gift given by God in which a person receives truth directly from God and then gives it to his people. Now remember that in the text I read above, Ephesians 2. 20, Paul specifically refers to apostles and prophets as the foundation of the church. This is important as we've already seen the work of the apostles and the prophets is to build that foundation, the revelatory instruction that God has given us for his people. So until the apostles were done, until the apostles and their partners had collected and authenticated all of the revelation we needed, God blessed his church with prophecy. He blessed them with revelation to help them know his will. Does that make sense? But think about this. 

There's no apostles today. People call themselves apostles, but the Bible says that an apostle is somebody who has seen Jesus Christ face to face. Someone who has participated in his ministry and Paul gets added in, he gets grafted on, one Corinthians 5. 8, he says, last of all, as to one untimely born, he appeared also to me. So there's Paul as the last apostle to be initiated. He's the last one to join this group, this foundation group. And then in about 80, 95, John, the apostle died. 

At that point, there's no more living apostles than you should know that if you study church history, that's the church accepted that. They said, okay, no more apostles. They were different from everybody else. They were set apart for a specific ministry that has been completed. So with the office of apostle finish, we have a situation in which no new canon biblical writings are being penned. The apostles are done working because they're in heaven now. Their work is finished. 

And that means we have a situation where the apostles aren't working anymore. They've given us the communication of truth that we need, and that means that that gap that the prophets filled is no longer necessary. Listen how John MacArthur explains it. I'm going to send it right over to him because he says it way better than I could. He says, before the canon of Scripture was complete, the doctrinal foundation of the church, which consists of divine revelation revealed through the apostles and the prophets, was still being established. Before the Bible was done, the canon was still being established. But once that foundation was laid with the complete completion of the New Testament, the purpose of those offices is fulfilled. 

The foundation is laid. To follow Paul's metaphor, the foundation is not rebuilt at every phase of construction. It is laid only once at the beginning of the foundation process. You go ask any builder how many times you build a foundation, you do it once. And if you do a good job, the building stands. You think God did a good job building his foundation? So the office of prophet is no longer necessary for the church. We have the testimony that we need preserved by the Holy Spirit in the Word of God. 

And that's why in the church today, we don't need prophets. Now here's the interesting thing. Remember, prophecy addressed a specific need for the early church, the need for God's revealed word direct from him. Well, if you believe that this Bible is God's revealed word direct from him, and if you believe that the word is complete and sufficient, then you can't really argue that prophecy is necessary. Why? Because then you're saying that there is a need that the word of God is not meeting. Here at Grace Lifeland and we teach that the word of God is clear, plain, and simple, and sufficient. And since the Bible claims to be sufficient, we don't need to look elsewhere. 

If there was a genuine prophecy today, it wouldn't be adding to Scripture because Scripture is sufficient. So that means the gift of prophecy, the office of prophet, they're no longer necessary because they have fulfilled the purpose that God intended them for. And so we treasure their work because it is necessary. It was necessary. And now we live by it. And that's where cessationists like you and I, who believe these gifts have ceased, we don't accept the office of prophecy anymore. That doesn't mean that we despise prophecies. 

Because we believe that we have them right here and we must live by them. And that's what we strive to do. Because we have God's word completed by the work of His apostles. We don't need new prophecy. Instead we value and we treasure and we uphold these utterances by valuing and treasuring and upholding the Bible. The word of God. Does that make sense? Now let's be careful not to lose track of where we're going. 

So far we've seen that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit by participating in the Spirit's work. And we've seen that if we want to participate in the work we need to know the word. We need the instruction manual, right? We need the plan. But here's the question. How do we know what to do with the word? We have it. How do we make sure that what we're hearing from it, the teaching or the preaching or the instruction or the equipping or the counseling is right? If we aren't going to despise prophecies, if we're going to resist the temptation to be cynical and say, none of that, how do we avoid swing the other way and just gobbily of accepting everything and everyone that comes through the door? And Paul wants us to understand that if we actually treasure God's word, we need to know what is truly his word. And we do that by our third point, we discern the Spirit's will. 

So we've seen that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit first by participating in the Spirit's work. And second, by treasuring his word. And third, we see now in verses 21 and 22, we live in light of the Holy Spirit by discerning his will. Look at verse 21. Paul writes, but test everything. So he's continuing that thought from verse 20. He says, do not despise prophecies, but test everything. 

Not to test is to check for genuineness. You know those pop-ups when you're out on the internet, you're trying to log in to something and this pop-up comes up and says, we need to verify that you're really human. So click on all the pictures of an upside down dodo bird. And you're trying to find them and you're pretty sure that's one, but then it's not. And it says, sorry, you're not a human and you lose all of your bank accounts. Right? Well, that's important work. The website really wants to make sure that you're not a hacker or a robot that's actually trying to steal someone's stuff. 

They don't want you to fake it. They don't want you to impersonate who you are. And so they are protecting. They are discerning if you are who you say you are. And that is what we need to do if we are not to despise prophecies. Now we call this the spiritual discipline of discernment. Paul could have said, look back at the text. 

He could have said, do not despise prophecies but test them. But he doesn't say that. What does he say? He doesn't despise prophecies but test everything. That's really interesting. He is expanding the scope of testing. See, Paul wants us to understand that anything that would claim to be revealing or explaining the word of God can and should be tested for genuineness. Anything that claims to be from God, whether it's direct word or an application of the word or an explanation of the word can and must be tested for genuineness. 

Now, how do we test a prophecy or a word from the Lord? Well, if we know what genuine prophecy is, genuine revelation is, then we have a standard to test by. Now, here's a good definition. Genuine prophecy reports God's own revelation of Christ and never deviates from Scripture. So anything that claims the authority of God will be consistent with what he has already said. And a great way of testing this is to check that person's teaching about Christ. 1 John 4, 1 through 3 says, beloved, do not believe every Spirit but test the spirits to see whether they are going to be tested. 1 John 4, 1 through 3 says, beloved, do not believe every Spirit but test the spirits to see whether they are from God. 

For many false prophets have gone out into the world. By this you know the Spirit of God, every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God. And every Spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. This is the Spirit of Antichrist which you heard was coming and is now in the world already. First, heresy, cults and dangerous teachers can be caught just if you look at their teaching about Christ. He is the center, he is the focal point of Christianity. And so when Satan devises schemes to mislead and misdirect God's people, he almost always starts with Christ. 

So look to how someone speaks of Christ if it is not biblical, have nothing to do with them. Now how does cessation is like us deal with this passage if we are not on the lookout for any new prophecies? The Thessalonians in their context, they were doing it in the context of receiving like we said that direct help from God, right? Well the primary way we do it is when we hear teaching from God's Word. See Ephesians 4, 11 through 12 says, and he gave the apostles, the prophets, the evangelists, the shepherds and teachers, to equip the saints for the work of ministry, for building up the body of Christ. So what that means is the prophetic utterances of the apostles and prophets which are preserved in the Word of God are what we have to give to you. The shepherds and teachers take those words and use them to equip the saints for ministry. And just as a side note, that is why I think that preaching is not the same as prophesying. Now you remember prophecy is the divine enablement of receiving and communicating direct verbal revelation from God the man. 

That means you get every word, every comma, right. Preaching on the other hand is interpreting those words. It's saying, here's what he said, here's what we do with it. Here's what it means, here's how you apply it. I think it's one degree of separation from the say of the Lord. Now that doesn't mean it's not serious. James 3, 1 tells us that not many of you should become teachers, my brothers, for you know that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness. 

Just because preaching isn't prophesying doesn't mean it's not important. Preaching is what we have today. Today the church works to understand those words of the prophets and the apostles so that we can be equipped so that we can be obedient so that we can participate in the work of the Holy Spirit to build a fully functioning church. Prophecy isn't for today. Now Revelation 11 tells us that in the end times God will use prophecy again but until then we are satisfied with knowing and studying this word of God and if you think you don't need any more of it, you're not looking hard enough. So to do that well we need to practice discernment and ensure that the preaching and the teaching and the instruction that we are sitting under lines up with the word of God. We test everything. 

So when we test teaching we hold it up to the word of God and it determine if it's consistent. Now there's an example of this in Scripture. The Bereans. See right after Paul left Thessalonica he came to the city of Berea where he taught the gospel but listen to how Luke describes the Bereans. Acts 1711. Now these Jews were more noble than those in Thessalonica. They received the word with all eagerness examining the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so. 

The Bereans were exemplifying exactly what Paul tells the Thessalonians to do in our passage. So you could argue the way Luke writes it that the Thessalonians are maybe a little too excited. So I said, yes, give it to me. What do I have to do? The Bereans are discerning. They're careful. They're taking the word and saying, say that again. Okay, we're going to, I think we get it. 

We see it now. We're in. They're exercising discernment. They didn't just take Paul at his word or listen because of his reputation or his speaking skills or his notoriety. We believe that if God was consistent, if he was speaking through Paul, then Paul's words, his teaching would line up with what God had already revealed. Luke doesn't call this cynicism. He doesn't call this pride. 

And if anyone calls you discerning what they're saying cynicism or pride, you should tell them that Luke calls this noble discernment is maturity. We test everything that claims to be from God. Now, here's one other application of this. One other aspect of this, everything. We can test and improve God's word. We can test and improve teaching from the word. But finally, we need to test our own convictions and conclusions. 

In other words, this standard for discernment is even true when people say, I feel really strongly about this. Or I think God is moving me to do this thing or I have a lot of peace about this. Or I'm convicted that this is what I need to do. If that feeling, if that sense, if that peace or conviction doesn't line up with God's word, it's not from God. God is consistent. He doesn't contradict himself. He doesn't change his mind. 

And that means that we can use his word to determine what is will for our lives is. Every text of scripture, every faithful teacher and every personal conviction about the word can and must be held up to the word and tested for genuineness. That's what Paul wants us to do. That's what we are called to do if we are going to treasure the word. So we test everything and what do we do with the results? Well, Paul tells us at the end of our text, look back at verse 21, he says, test everything, hold fast to what is good, abstain from every form of evil. Now, I'm hoping that none of you have had to do a COVID test recently. Remember having to swab yourself? Remember that terrible feeling? I had to swab Arlo so many times just to get into this country. 

And I kid you not. I felt like he was about to run away because every time I came with that swab, he was running away. Well, so we're testing, we're doing all this testing and if the test comes back positive, what does that mean? Means you're off limits. You're stuck, you're locked down, you're quarantined. You are prohibited from participation. Well, that's the same with prophecy, but it's even more intense. Now, when you look at, if you've got your ESV, where it says, hold fast to what is good, full stop, abstain from every form of evil. 

It's got two different sentences. But Paul is using two verbs in these two clauses that are the same form of the verb with a different prefix and that's nerdy grammar talk, but essentially what he's saying is he's saying, hold on to what is good and hold off from every form of evil. It's the same command and that means that while abstaining from every form of evil is something we should do in the context of this verse, he's saying, when you test, you get two results, good or evil. Just like a COVID test, positive or negative. There's no sorta okay, there's no decent, there's no 50, 50 prophecies. There's good and there's evil. It's consistent with God's word or it's inconsistent. 

And what I'm not saying is that means that every text of scripture, every word of teaching or advice is equally important or even equally clear, but Paul makes it clear that this test is pass fail. Does that make sense? Remember that because we need to come back to it. When we hold fast to what is good, when we test something and we find that it passes the test, this word hold fast is to cling to it, to treasure it, to commit it to our minds so that we would never forget it. See, discernment is like panning for gold. When you're panning for gold, I don't know if you know what that is, they did it in the old days in America where I come from. So you would put a bowl into the water where there was supposedly gold and you'd sift it and you'd try to find these little bits of gold and some of them would be gold and some of them wouldn't it. So you're testing them. 

Whenever you find gold, you've won, right? That's what you're after. It's a party. It's a treasure. You never let it out of your sight. Right? You're taking all those little nuggets and you're keeping them because that's your life. You live by what you prove to be true. This is how you avoid quenching the spirit. 

You find what is true. You remember it and you commit yourself to it. And just as important, when you're panning for gold, anything that's not gold, you're getting rid of it. Right? They have something called fool's gold. The fool keeps it. Get it out of here. Right? Whatever isn't gold is useless. 

It's in the way. You don't keep it on the side. You get it away so that it's not getting mixed up with what you've found. Discernment results in faithfulness because people with discernment have done the hard work of knowing what God wants them to do. If you sift and you find that gold, you have what you need to be faithful to God. Christian, when you find good teaching, when you find the word of God clearly instructed, cling to it, treasure it, never let it go, make it a part of your life. That's what Paul's telling us to do here. 

And just as extreme as you hold onto that truth, you get rid of what is evil. And you can see again, he says every form of evil, he's expanding it even more. He's saying, even if it's sort of evil, you don't want anything to do with it. Now this leads us to one more point of clarification. We're going to go back into this whole debate. See some people who believe that prophecy is active today, remember they call themselves continuationists, they use these verses to argue for something that they call fallible prophecy. Here's how they argue that. 

They take our text as proof that sometimes the prophets in the early church, they weren't so reliable, so they need to be tested. And then they look at 1 Corinthians 429, which says, let two or three prophets speak and let others weigh what is said. So in their reasoning, the church isn't panning for gold. Prophecy is more like the Olympics. The church's prophets perform and they get a score from 1 to 10 from the judges. You're going for a 10, but you get a 6, you might still get a bronze medal. Some even believe that the prophets got the word from God, but then when they spoke, they messed it up. 

They didn't deliver it properly. They miscommunicated. So in their argument, Paul is telling the church to create a system where prophets are delivering their messages and then the church is discerning how valuable it is, and that this is a regular occurrence, prophets get up, and it's not the prophet who's tested, it's the word that's tested. Now you could see this in one of two ways. First, they're great prophecies, mediocre prophecies, and bad prophecies. Or you could see it as saying that anyone can prophesy whenever they want, and then their prophecy is assessed as valid or not. If they fail, the prophecy is rejected, but the prophet isn't. 

They just got that prophecy wrong, but that doesn't mean that they can't prophesy anymore. Does that make sense? That's what their saying was happening in churches like the church at Thessalonica. So is this valid? Can there be fallible prophecy? Let me start by saying, yes, the Bible is clear that there is fallible prophecy. Biblical prophets, as we have said, were gifted with the responsibility to take words directly from God and give them to man. Throughout the Bible, prophets who communicated prophecy that was untrue or was inconsistent or was misleading, do you know what the Bible calls them? False prophets. So we're not asking if fallible prophecy exists. We're asking if there's an acceptance of false prophecy in the church. 

That's what's at stake here. We're asking if there's an acceptance of incorrect or unclear prophecy within the early church. And here's the deal. If there was, if that's the case, we need to be able to prove a clear difference between the prophecy and the Old Testament and what's happening in the New Testament. Because the Old Testament standard for prophecies and for prophets was no laughing matter. See, Moses is very clear with Israel in Deuteronomy 3 that, 13, that anyone who claimed to be a prophet but led people away from the God of Scripture was a liar. And that if that happened, they should be killed. 

No second chances. They don't get to try again next week. You get to speak for God, you better not mess it up. Deuteronomy 1822, Moses says that the words of a genuine prophet as in his predictions for the future will come true if he's not from God. If his prophecies do not come true, he's a false prophet. And again, Israel should kill him. Again, no second chances. 

Finally, Isaiah makes this abundantly clear in Isaiah 820. The New King James has a beautiful translation of this. It says about anyone who claims to speak for God. Listen to this. Once they speak to the law and to the testimony, if they do not speak according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. If you don't stand up and say, I speak for God and then it lines up with Scripture, there's no light in you. Remember, if you're a prophet, you are speaking on behalf of God. 

There's a huge responsibility there. God has a very low tolerance for error because God doesn't want his people living in confusion. If a prophet fails, if he comes and says, I'm from God and he creates confusion, he's dead. Because that doesn't help God's people. That's not the purpose of prophecy. So in the Old Testament, fallible prophecy wasn't tolerated. It is a one strike rule. 

A fallible prophet is a dead prophet. But continuationists want to argue that in the New Testament this was different. They justify this by downgrading the prophecy that's occurring in the New Testament Church. They say it wasn't as serious as all that. But let me ask you this. What does Paul say the apostles and prophets are doing? They are building the foundation of the church so the church can be a temple and a dwelling place for God. That seems pretty serious to me. 

You think God wants the people who are building the foundation, sending mixed signals? One commentator says, no where does the Bible make a provision for a well-meaning prophet who garbles his message? And you know what? Even Paul holds himself to this standard. Look what he says in Galatians 1 verse 8. But even if we or an angel from heaven should preach to you a gospel contrary to the one we have preached to you, let him be a cursed. So if a apostle says something that's not in line with the word of God, if an angel says something that's not in line with the word of God, they're kicked out of the church. So if they're at the top, why would prophets get any other standard? The communication of God's word is no light matter. Now here's a practical thought about this. If you're in a church where they practice prophecy and they're encouraging you to try to prophesy. 

If they're inviting you, go ahead give it a shot. Why don't you offer us a word from the Lord? You need to understand what a serious thing that is. If someone is inviting you to do that, they're probably not taking prophecy as seriously as God does. Do you see that? You see when someone says that God tolerated fallible prophecy or as the Old Testament would say false prophets in his church, they're saying that the God who wanted no confusion for Israel was fine with confusion in the church. We know God doesn't want Israel confused, but the church is okay. That's not consistent. That's not how God works. 

If that were the case, the New Testament would have made it, had to make it extremely clear that there's a difference now. And no text in Scripture does that. If you be one thing, if that verse I referenced earlier, 1 Corinthians 1429 read, let two or three prophets speak and let the others weigh what it said. If the guy gets it wrong, he needs to keep working on his gift for a while. Take your time, be patient, he'll grow into it. That's not what it says. It says, way what he says, and we do so, Paul says, in the context of who God is. 

Three verses later, he says, for God is not a God of confusion, but of peace. And then he says this, in verses 37 and 38 of 1 Corinthians 14, if anyone thinks that he is a prophet or spiritual, he should acknowledge that the things I'm writing to you are a command of the Lord. In other words, he should say what I am saying is consistent with God's Word. If anyone does not recognize this, he is not recognized. That sounds to me like the exact same standard. The same level of seriousness and scrutiny is the Old Testament prophets. Now, Paul doesn't go on to say, so kill him. 

So that's good, right? The elders are not tasked with killing false prophets today, right? That's a relief. But they're not given a platform. They're not given a place to speak. The practice of fallible prophecy was not permitted in these contexts. Paul is telling us that there is only one kind of prophecy worth listening to, that which passes the test of discernment and is good. He's saying, follow the example of the Bereans. They tested Paul's teaching, found it good, and held fast to it. 

And that is what you and I are meant to do, Christian. Fowlable prophecy cannot be allowed in the church because if it is not good, it is evil, and we are told to abstain from it. So we don't allow foulable prophecy in our church. We don't need new prophecy in our church because we have God's completed word right here to study and believe. At this stage of church history, you and I do this by examining the teaching, examining the elders and the pastors and the instructors and the Bible study leaders. We examine the conclusions of our own hearts and we make sure that they are consistent with what the scripture says. If they pass the test, we rejoice and we cling to the truth. 

And if they're not biblical, we reject that teaching, that conviction, that feeling, that teacher, that church, and we continue to study and seek out the truth. Because we're called to live in light of God's spirit. We do this by participating in His work, and to do this properly, we must treasure His word by discerning His will. Christian, you have an important job to do. You have to be a contributing member of a fully functioning church of God. We've seen this as a high standard. You have to submit to authority joyfully, you have to live peaceably, you have to love patiently. 

You're forgiving your enemies and living in constant, unceasing, worship, prayer, and thankfulness. Now if you're honest with yourself, you know that this is something you cannot do on your own. You need help. But your Savior Jesus Christ knew that. And so, as we work to be a fully functioning church and operate according to His plan, Jesus gives us the gift of the helper, the job site manager, the general contractor, who will help us in this building work, His Holy Spirit. And so we work in light of Him. We work to be faithful. 

And that's why in this text, Paul teaches us that the fully functioning church lives in light of God's Spirit. We need to be diligent not to quench the Holy Spirit's work, not to interrupt or slow down or halt what He is doing. And we do this by treasuring His word, by diligently discerning what His will is and then doing it. Now I want to close on a different note. In Ephesians 430, Paul writes, and do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. You see, Paul is telling us that any work which quenches the Holy Spirit's work and in through us, grieves Him. Why do we close with this? It's actually not to discourage us. 

It's to encourage us. Because this verse tells you, Christian, that the Spirit is eager to help you. He's not the force. We aren't Jedi. He's not this impersonal act of nature. He is a divine person who is committed to glorifying Christ by working in and through you and me. And that means that just as much as He has grieved when we quench the Spirit, He is delighted when we work in the Holy Spirit. 

When we work with Him. Christian, you are engaged in the difficult work of being sanctified and being useful to God and you are not alone. God is committed to working with you. He is personally involved in your success. When you live in light of the Spirit, you grow in Christ's likeness. When we live in light of the Spirit, we will become a fully functioning church. That is what we are called to do. 

It is challenging work, but praise God, we are not alone. He promises to do that work and through the Spirit who indwells us, He will surely do it. Amen? Let's pray. Lord God, we thank You for the gift of Your Spirit. We thank You that He is committed to glorifying You through making us yours, making us like You and using us to build and to bless Your church. We thank You for the saving and sanctifying work of the Holy Spirit. We thank You that He empowers our service to one another. 

We pray that we would participate faithfully in Your work. We would not quench Your Spirit. We pray that You would help us to do this by treasuring Your Word as we discern Your will and find what is good and true. Help us to cling to it, make it our treasure and live by it, Lord. We pray now as we get to celebrate the Lord's table and worship together and reflect on the work of Christ, Lord, that we would be amazed and new at what You have done to rescue us and the gift You have given us in Your Spirit. Please, as we said earlier, for those who are resisting Your Spirit, Lord, convict them now, bring them to You, bring them to repentance and allow them to begin to participate in this precious work for Your glory. We pray in Your name, amen. 

. 