---
title: "Problems with Corrupt Authorities part 1- Titus 31-2"
date: 2022-11-07
draft: false
---
It is well. What do you say to that? Is it well? Is it well because of God's great love? I know that we are not well. I know that because like half of the church is missing and the music team have had to contend with disasters in terms of availability and we've watched our church staff go down and their families go down and the bug is reproducing well around the country. But is it well with your soul? We had a great hymn that we began this afternoon's worship with and Mike drew attention to the words, the vilest offender who truly believes that moment from Jesus a pardon receives. It's possible you know to be well, for it to be well between you and God and it's possible for that to be solved in a moment. Isn't that wonderful? Isn't it wonderful that it's possible because of what Jesus did on the cross for you, for the vilest offender, for the most foul sinner, it's possible for you to be completely forgiven through the work of Jesus on the cross. Praise God for that. 

And I praise God for His providence because in God's providence He knew that I needed the words of that song today. They ministered to my soul in the first service and I hope that they've ministered to you. They've blessed me again to just remember that there are all these clouds, there are all these troubles, but if God's loved us, if God has set His love upon us so that He sent His own son to the cross to die for us, all is well, right? Are you convinced of that? Are you convinced of it for you? I hope so. Now my job is to preach to you, not just get carried away with commenting on the song. So we're back in Titus if you want to turn your way, find your way in your Bible to Titus chapter 3. You have to bear with me a little bit today. I'm dealing with physical weakness, but also a burdened soul. 

I'll explain that to you later. I need to talk to you about an issue that we face as a church. And if you remember, it's very important for you to hear what I'll talk about afterwards before we talk about the celebration of the Lord's table. So please bear with me as I deal with some of that struggle in my own soul and just the burden that that has put upon my ministry today. I ask you to pray for me as I preach for that strength and help that the Lord can give. We're going to pick up our study in Titus chapter 3. There's something actually here for us in Titus 3. 

Maybe you've not noticed this about this chapter. It's easy to skip past some verses as you study the Bible and miss an important thread that is there for us if you study it carefully. I've never personally studied these verses as closely as I have in the last few weeks preparing for this message and the series of sermons that I'm going to preach from chapter 3. But as I have studied it very closely, there's a particular thought, a thread of thought that goes through chapter 3. And I think it's going to be very helpful for us. It has to do with our problems with the authorities, our problems with corrupt authorities. Let's begin just by reading the chapter, then I'll pray. 

And then we'll come back to it and look carefully at verses 1 and 2 today. I'm reading from the legacy standard Bible. It doesn't mean that we've switched as a church. It just means that I'm still doing what I started a while ago, which is using the LSB during our study in Titus to kind of try it out. But also, I need to find someone to rebind my trusty ESV. ESV. And I still haven't. 

So meanwhile, let's read this. The LSB is now on the screen, which is helpful. In chapter 3, Paul is giving Titus instructions about how to set things in order in the churches on the island of Crete. Verse 1, Paul says, remind them to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work, to slander no one, to be peaceable, considerate, demonstrating all gentleness to all men. For we ourselves also were once foolish, disobedient, deceived, enslaved to various lusts and pleasures, spending our life in malice and envy, despicable, hating one another. But when the kindness and affection of God our Savior appeared, He saved us, not by works, which we did in righteousness, but according to His mercy, through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit. And He poured out upon us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior, so that having been justified by His grace, we would become heirs according to the hope of eternal life. 

This is a trustworthy saying. And concerning these things, I want you to speak confidently so that those who have believed God will be intent to lead in good works. These things are good and profitable for men, but avoid foolish controversies, genealogies, and strife and conflicts about the law, for they're unprofitable and worthless. Reject a factious man after a first and second warning, knowing that such a man is perverted and is sinning, being self-condemned. When I send Artemis or Tychicus to you, be diligent to come to me at Nicopolis, for I have decided to spend the winter there. Diligently help and help send Zenos, the lawyer, and Apollos on their way, so that nothing is lacking for them. And our people must also learn to lead in good works, to meet pressing needs, so that they will not be unfruitful. 

All who are with me, greet you. Greet those who love us in the faith. Grace be with you all. Well, let's pray. Father in heaven, we do pray to you, our God, our King, our sovereign, and our help. Lord, without you, we can do nothing. Lord, without your help, we would sink, Lord, under the weight of our own sin, under the weight of the sins of your people even, just unable to bear the problems that we create for ourselves. 

Lord, have mercy upon us. Please help us. Pray for your help for me now to strengthen me to be able to preach your word. Pray that you'd give us all great grace as we try to attend to the truth that you have for us in this next part of Titus. Thank you, Lord, for leading us through. Thank you for giving us the privilege and the peace to be able to study this verse by verse, to be able to find out what you have for us today. Please strengthen us, equip us, and correct us. 

Lord, we pray, realizing that you and you alone can do all of this. And more than that, you can do exceedingly above all that we ask or think. So we do ask you for that, Lord. We pray for your help and blessing in Jesus' name. Amen. Well, today we're going to begin our study in Titus chapter three with a close look at verses one and two. And I want to talk with you today about one of the problems we can have with corrupt authorities. 

And it's a problem that we can have in response to the reality connected to the fact that we have to deal with authorities and rulers that are, that are, can I just say less than ideal? Is that adequate British understatement for you? I think actually there are three problems to do with this that Paul is dealing with in chapter three. We're just going to look at the first one today, and it's here in verses one and two. Paul says, remind them to be subject to rulers, to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work, to slander no one, to be peaceable, considerate, demonstrating all gentleness to all men. Now, if you read that in Greek, if you have one, pull out your Greek New Testament, have a look at it. It's going to be easier for you to see what's going on here. And for those of you that didn't bring your Greek New Testament to church today, I'll do you this, the easy, I'll do it for you the easy way and I'll give you a word for word translation of what it, what it reads in Greek. Remind them, those are the first two words. 

And then it says, it says, two rulers, two authorities. And then there's a list of seven kind of to be commands, to be subject, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work and so on. And the fourth one is not phrased as a to be command, but it is an infinitive verb. They're all infinitive verbs, you're not afraid of grammar, are you? I know that you have to be not afraid of grammar to come to Grace Life London. An infinitive verb is the to be version of a verb. It's hard to translate them all smoothly into English. If you pay attention to the grammar though, basically the picture that we've got here is a couple of statements, you remind them, these two statements towards rulers, towards authorities. 

So everything that's about to be said is concerning our relationship to rulers and authorities. And then there are these statements to be this, to be that, to be the other and so on. And I'm going to say Paul gives them seven things that they have to be to the rulers and authorities. It's quite simple. That's the structure. Now, do you remember having problems with how you relate to the authorities? Has anyone struggled with that? How should you be towards the authorities, the rulers that we have in our society? There can be a problem there. And the first problem that we can have with corrupt authorities is that when they're corrupt, it can do something to us and it can cause us to be quick to forget how we are supposed to be in response to them. 

Are you with me with that struggle? That's the problem that Paul is dealing with here in verses one and two when he reminds Titus, when he tells Titus to remind them and then gives them a list of seven things that they're supposed to be. The problem is that they're prone to forget. Why are they prone to forget? Well, I'll try to explain that as we go. If you're taking notes today, just to kind of give you the warning about my outline, I'm going to be planning to work through verses one and two and to remind you of seven things that we have to be towards rulers and authorities. It's really straightforward. I'm going to try to do what Paul told Titus to do for the Christians on Crete. We're only going to get through the first three. 

So, the follow-up will be next week. But these are fundamental attitudes. These are fundamental, you could say stances that we need to have towards those who are our rulers and our authorities. And I just got to say, we don't get an exemption from these fundamental attitudes or stances simply because the rulers are immoral or the rulers are corrupt. Let's start this list and we'll just work through them and I think you'll get where I'm going. First of all, you have to be subject to rulers and authorities. You have to be subject. 

Do you have a problem with authority itself? Anyone have a problem with authority? There are some Christians in the churches on the island of Crete who were having problems with authority. And I know that because Paul has to remind them to be subject. If you need to be reminded to be subject to authority, it means you've got a problem with being subject to authority. You're forgetting. And that's not unexpected, is it? I think if you'd been there, I think if you'd been there, many of you would have also had problems with the authorities on the island of Crete. Their government, their rulers were not exactly ideal. It was a Roman colony. 

In fact, Mark Antony had given the island of Crete as a gift to Cleopatra, yes, that Cleopatra, back in the day after he'd been involved in murdering Caesar and all the trouble that came after that. If you know some Roman history, the wars that came later. And then it's not that was, I think Caesar died in 60 something BC, 67 or something like that BC. But then you've got this period of trouble. And by the time you get to the 60s AD, when Paul is on Titus, Crete is a, you would say, well-established, pretty typical Roman colony island. It's a place where Roman law, Roman authority structures rule with all the political infighting and social and political climbing and the purchasing of power and position that went on in Roman society. If you know something about ancient Rome, you can maybe picture a little bit of what that looks like. 

Think of the mess in our own political world that comes with people who are scheming, lying, people whose personal morality is utterly corrupt and they're climbing the political ladder and in this case, in those days, literally murdering the people who stood in their way. Now add in the character of the people on the island of Crete. You remember this from chapter 1? And verse 12, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts and lazy gluttons. Who said that? Epimenides, an ancient Cretan poet. And he said it about his own people, but Paul quotes it and says, this testimony is true. That was the summary of the character of the people on the island of Crete. That was the character of the populace from which the politicians grew. 

So what was it like? How would you feel being under those kind of authorities? What were your options in those days? Could you imagine how some of that corruption could give you a problem with authority? One of the problems that's connected with authority is the reality that it's connected to power. There's a lot said about that these days, isn't there? But corrupt, immoral, ungodly authorities have the power, don't they, to make laws that impact us as Christians, that impact ordinary citizens and that they have the power to make laws to tell us that we have to do certain things that we just cannot do if we're going to be obedient to God. And they have the power to forbid us from doing certain things, which God tells us very plainly, we must do. And so true Christians have always had to navigate that difficult territory of being willing to say to the authorities, to corrupt, to oppressive, powerful, nevertheless authorities, to be willing to say no, to be willing to say, I'm sorry, but we're not doing that. And I think that's the thing, they say, I'm sorry, but we're not doing that. And I'm really sorry, but we're going to carry on doing that. You know that we've had to navigate those waters in the last couple of years. 

It is written large in the Bible from the Old Testament right through where the people of God have had to say no, even to their own corrupt political leaders. At times when the priesthood has been corrupt, the people have had to say no. At times when the king has been corrupt, the priests have had to say no. And the message in the Bible is that there are these times when to deal with corrupt authorities and corrupt rulers. Now, that should make you willing to disobey when God, as your higher authority, says differently, right? And that's been a big thing for us to get used to. But it's actually kind of normal in the Bible. And it's kind of interesting that when we come to a passage like today, that's not the problem that Paul is dealing with for the people on the island of Crete. 

Actually, it's not the problem that Paul raises and addresses when he talks to the Romans who had to deal with very corrupt political authorities and rulers and leaders in their setting. It's not the problem that Peter chose to address when he spoke to the issue of our relationship to civil corrupt authorities with Nero as the emperor. The problem that Peter and Paul and also Jesus major on dealing with is a problem that we can have as a reaction to the corruption in authority. It's a problem that we can find in ourselves when we are faced with corrupt authorities who put pressure on us. Well, what am I talking about? I'm saying it is one thing to rightly have to say no to corrupt authorities, but have you ever found yourself getting a little carried away with that? Have you ever found yourself saying legitimately, no, this is government overreach, but then ending up feeling free to just disregard authorities and government in areas where you actually ought to submit? Have you felt that danger? I'm sure you'd at least agree that that danger exists. And my concern today as I come to preach this next passage in Titus to you, is to just give you the truth of the Bible at this point. And we have to say, look, this is in the Bible, we have to deal with it. 

We've been focusing a little bit on the exceptions, but now we need to look at the rule. And I think it is a special problem for God's people, the more corrupt the authorities and the rulers become. And we just have to face it, some of our rulers are morally reprehensible, aren't they? They're morally off the scale when it comes to what we would look at and say, we respect that in the person. But we can't say anything would have been different for the Christians on the island of Crete or the Christians in Rome. They could have said, as they looked at their own political setting, it's a swamp. And we have to say no to the corrupt authorities, but then it is possible to end up using that as an excuse for behaving badly as Christian citizens. And that's the issue that Paul is addressing here. 

I think that's why Paul has to remind them to be submissive to rulers and authorities and so on. Are you with me? We're making some sense? Well, the danger is they're going to be forgetting. And the first thing we have to be reminded of is that we need to be subject. So let's just think about that. The word to be subject is the word huppotassestai. In Greek, it's from the verb form huppotasso. The meaning is very simple. 

Huppotasso means to put something underneath something else. Tasso. Tasso means to place or to arrange or to appoint. Huppo means under. And so it's very simply has to do with arranging things underneath other things. If you're following that, it means to subordinate. In military terms, it obviously has to do with being arranged in rank, superior rank and inferior rank. 

You've got to know who's above you. You've got to know who you are under in the military. And it has to do with authority. The idea here in the verb is passive. It's in a passive form. It's to be, where to be, you would say, in a state of being subjected. Well, that's an interesting concept, isn't it? We're to be in a state of being subject to rulers and authorities. 

Now, what is that? The opposite? It's the opposite of being insubordinate. This is being subordinate. Well, you understand what it means, don't you, to be insubordinate. And that's otherwise translated as rebellious. And so this is connected with submission. Often in the Bible, very commonly this word is used in that context. This is the idea of seeing yourself as inherently subordinate to the self, as inherently being under another person's authority or an authority structure. 

Now, can I just point out the obvious? Christians are to be the opposite of that. Christians are to be the opposite of insubordinate, the opposite of rebellious, the opposite of putting themselves above those authority structures. We are to consider ourselves in our fundamental stance as being under rulers and authorities. And I have to confess, I struggle with that sometimes. And I have to confess, as I look back over the last couple of years, I don't regret the decisions that we've made about saying no to certain decisions that the government has made and certain impositions that I believe were incorrect upon churches. And I wish I'd had better insight to it, to be able to give you better leadership to it earlier as we dealt with those issues as a church. And it was difficult for us all, but I personally have, as I've studied this text, I've lived with a certain amount of regret and had to confess to the Lord and think about the reality that there are times when I found myself moving away as I began to say, no, I'm fed up with this, let's call it governmental overreach. 

And then you say, well, it's very easy, isn't it, to stray at certain points and to stray from an attitude, a fundamental attitude of submission and subordination. Now, I know that there are these exceptions. We'll have to give a whole sermon to it at some point. This week, I read the best part of three books that deal with this issue of how to navigate the difficulties when government says one thing, but God says the other. How do we deal with those tensions, the tension between the duty to be subject and the duty to be subject to the higher authority which comes from God? Okay, we can deal with that. We have been dealing with that. We must understand when and how we need to do that, but we have to say those are the exceptions and this is the rule. 

And that's very clear in the balance of the biblical teaching. I just want to mention that. I don't want to get into it because this is point one and there are seven points. We're only going to do three of them today, but I need to move on. So, if you can take it from me, that's point one. Point one in our list of seven things that we're to be in our relation, in our stance, seven fundamental attitudes or stances that we need to take towards rulers and authorities. Number one is we must be subject. 

Number two in our list of seven is the next phrase. You also have to be obedient to rulers and authorities. This is also in verse one. We're only going to do verse one today, by the way. This is actually from the Greek verb, paethecho, which means I obey. It comes from an interesting Greek word, paetho, paetho, which means I persuade or I convince. You may be heard of someone speaking with great pathos. 

It's where that word comes from in its very persuasive speech. But over time, this word just came to mean someone who listens to what's said and obeys instruction, someone who is, you would say, persuadable by words, by logic, by reason, by argument. But over time, it just took on the meaning and usage of meaning I obey, someone who is fundamentally in a position of listening to instruction or someone who fundamentally doesn't. We all know what that's like. You've been in school, at least I would say almost all of you have been in school, I'm sure, and known that kid in the class. Some of you have to teach that kid in the class who just fundamentally isn't listening. Why? Not just because he's disobedient occasionally, not just because occasionally he says, I'm not going to do that, but because fundamentally he's taken on a position of saying, I'm not listening. 

You can say all you want. I'm not even hearing you. I've just switched off. I'm disobedient. And there are those children, aren't they, in classes, and then there are those people in society who fundamentally are rejecting the idea that they have to obey authority and they're just not listening. This is the passive aggressive version of not, of unsubmission, isn't it? This is just saying, you know, you can talk to the hand, the face is not listening. I'm not doing this. 

Now, again, very obvious, we as Christians, we can't be that towards rulers and authorities. We have to be the opposite. Our basic stance needs to be one of, I'm listening, I'm obedient. You give me an instruction, I'll do it. That's my fundamental stance. Why? Because I'm under, I'm not over. I don't see myself as being exempt from my duties as a citizen. 

I don't see myself as being above government, above rulers, above authorities. I'm not the captain of the fate and the master of my destiny. I'm not the king of my castle. I'm a subject to the king. I'm a subject to my rulers. I'm a subject to my authorities. I'm under, not over. 

Do you get this? This is a fundamental stance. And we need to be known for that. Now, let me highlight again, it's possible, isn't it, to be known as someone who is fundamentally obedient, fundamentally someone who just accepts commands, accepts instructions, who sees themselves as subordinate, as subject to authorities, and yet to say, I respect you, I respect authority, but I won't do that. That's not being known as a rebel. That's not being known as a disobedient person. That's being known as someone who says, you know what, that's my stance, but I have a higher authority that I am listening to, and God says, I must do this. God says, I must not do that. 

I cannot in all good conscience obey in this occasion, and I'll take the consequences. That's a different attitude altogether, and I just want to highlight that has to be our stance. As Christian citizens, I almost called this series Christian citizens in a Cretan culture, not because it was all seas, but you know those kind of things appeal to preachers. If we can alliterate, we love it. But people have lost the idea of being citizens, haven't they? Do you have an idea of yourself as a citizen? Most of you don't. Most of you just think of yourself as a consumer or a customer, or maybe you see yourself as a boss, or you see yourself as a dreamer who's just living out his or her dreams. But as Christians, we are citizens of this world, are we not? And as citizens of this world, we have to be subject to rulers and authorities. 

Come in, please come in. Maybe brother, you could turn the bell off or just put it out in the hallway for us so that we don't get that. All right, thirdly, finally on our list of three today, we must be ready for every good work. Do you see that in verse one? This is the verb to be. This is something that you must be, that I must be. And it's a huge theme in the book of Titus, Paul's letter to Titus. I'll trace it for you briefly in a moment. 

If you've got a pen or pencil handy, you could probably circle the words in all the verses and it really helps to connect the dots and as you see the theme stand out from the page as you read your own Bible. But before we get there, what are good works? Would you be able to define good works? That's an interesting question, isn't it? I'm going to say good works are the outward fruits of the change that God has done in your heart for a Christian. It's the outward visible evidence of the understanding, the light that is inside of you. Jesus said it like this, let your light so shine before men in such a way that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven. So, good works are the visible outward practical outworking of the change that God has made in our heart, the light that we have inside of us coming out in our actions, in our practical activities. Would you agree? Now, that outward fruit could be an act of devotion to God, could be an act of love and sacrifice to God just between you and God, couldn't that? Could be prayer, could be like the woman who came with an alabaster jar and broke it open and poured it out on Jesus' head, sacrificing that very, very costly years salary worth of perfume, of ointment and pouring it on Jesus' head. I mean, say this is bizarre, yeah, but it was an act of love and sacrificial devotion on the part of that woman who kind of understood that she was doing it for his burial and Jesus called it specifically a good work, a good work. 

It could also be practical acts of sacrificial love to others. I mean, I'm talking about an act of sacrificial love to God either in your prayer life or in your service for Him in the church, but then there's the practical acts of love and sacrifice for others to meet their needs. Think of Dorcas, not our Dorcas, but the biblical Dorcas who was in Joppa and who died. Remember her? Tabitha and she was raised from the dead by Peter, but before he raised her from the dead, Luke tells us that she, in Acts 9. 36, he says, this woman was full of good works and charity, which she continually did. What does it mean to be full of good works? Well, we get that played out for us because when Peter got there, all the widows stood beside him crying and showing all the tunics and the garments that Dorcas used to make while she was with them. This is a woman who just sees the need in others. 

This person doesn't have a tunic, let me make one. This person doesn't have a garment, let me make one. And she's doing it, she's meeting all these practical needs in needy people. And the Bible very specifically highlights that as a good work. Good works are outward, good works that are visible, good works Paul says are obvious, evident. 1 Timothy 5. 25 Paul says, good works are quite evident. 

He talks about also the reality that bad works show themselves. 1 Timothy 6. 18, he tells Timothy to command Christians, this will be in Ephesus, to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous and ready to share. Now that's interesting because he pairs doing good, being rich in good works with being generous and ready to share. And it's so interesting because this theme in the Bible comes out, you could think of James who says, true religion and undefiled is this, to visit the orphans and the widows and fatherless in their distress. Distress, I'm misquoting it. Anyway, you know that James 1. 

27, visit them in their distress. And this is a practical outworking of true religion, isn't it? This is the outward showing. It's very often connected as James does when he connects it with not just saying to someone, be warmed and filled. What good is that? If you don't meet their needs, you don't give them what they need. You can't just say to them, be warmed and filled. I wish you well, I pray for you. If you have it in your hand to meet their need, I mean, that's faith without works, James says. 

That's dead. That's just ridiculous. It's what's inside you that James argues in James chapter 2, that the genuine saving faith works. It comes out with works and true saving faith is never faith that is alone. There's always works that flow from it. That's James chapter 2 and I don't really have time to go there and work through it. But I'm just saying this is a common thread in the Bible. 

Good works are often connected with being generous and ready to share with others, meeting other people's need. Now, come back to Titus. I told you I'd do a little study quickly in this theme of good works in Titus because it's a big theme. Look at chapter 1 verse 16, Titus chapter 1 and verse 16. They profess to know God, but by their works, they deny Him, being detestable and disobedient and unfit for any good work. Titus chapter 2 now, look at verse 7, he tells Titus, as for you, be a model of good works, he says. Titus, you've got to show people good works. 

Titus chapter 2 verse 14, he says, basically, I'm summarizing Jesus gave Himself for us to make us into a people zealous for good works. Are you? That's an interesting question, isn't it? Do you wake up in the morning saying, what good work do you have for me to do today, Lord? Where can I be generous and share? How can I sacrificially love my Savior today? What can I do? This is interesting, isn't it? Chapter 3 verse 1, he tells Titus to remind us to be ready for every good work. And then chapter 3 verse 8, he says that we're supposed to, excuse me, we're supposed to be intent to lead in good works, to lead in good works. And finally, in chapter 3 verse 14, he closes up this theme in Titus as he closes up the book. And he connects good works again with meeting other people's needs and fruitfulness, as in fruitfulness being the productiveness of the faith that's in you, right? So chapter 3 verse 14, look at this, and our people must also learn to lead in good works. And finally, in chapter 3 verse 14, he says, we must lead in doing good works to meet pressing needs. That phrase, to meet pressing needs is not separate, it's connected, to lead in good works to meet pressing needs. 

He's talking about a missionary, Zenas the lawyer, make sure he has everything he needs. Our people need to learn to lead in doing good works to meet pressing needs. When there's a need to lead in saying, let me share, let me give, let me help. Is that you? Is that what you want to do? He says, so that they will not be unfruitful. In other words, if you don't do that, your faith is not producing fruit. Fruit is going to come out in action, isn't it? You will know them by their fruits, Jesus said. So, what fruits, what good works are on display? Jesus said, let your light so shine that men may see your good works and glorify your father who's in heaven. 

You're supposed to be able to see true religion. You say that you have faith, says James, but faith without works is dead. That doesn't save you. It doesn't save anyone if it doesn't change your life and produce works, right? Now, I need to be careful to qualify all of this in a minute. And I'm going to take a moment to do that, to say that I'm not saying that you're going to be saved by good works. Let's come back there in a moment, but let me just finish this point. What is going on here? What's going on here is, it's kind of helpful to realize that Titus is very clear in telling us that we need to be characterized by good works, okay? But now in this chapter, in this verse, this being, always being ready, what does it say? To be ready for every good work. 

This is in connection with our relationship to the authorities and the rulers. And you're like, hold on a minute. What is this? What is being ready for every good work got to do with my relationship with the authorities and the rulers? And I think you're perhaps here in for a little aha moment as I was. This is actually really telling. What is your relationship to the authorities and the rulers? This is going to force you to ask the question, okay, how do I view the people who are above me in that authority structure and the people who rule that I'm subject to? How do I view them when they are corrupt, morally reprehensible, and people who, if I were to be asked, do I want them to be my rulers? I would say no, thank you very much and probably something stronger. But they are my rulers. They are my authorities. 

And nobody's particularly asking me except once every few years in a vote. And that doesn't seem to count for very much. But I'm not saying don't vote for me. But I'm not saying don't vote. I'm saying do vote. But I'm just saying my vote doesn't seem to change anything, although I try every year to vote for the lesser of two evils. But here we are with corrupt leaders. 

We vote in one corrupt leader and then they kill each other and we get another corrupt leader and it just seems to go on. And we're left still with corrupt leaders who are bringing out laws that we say are wrong and are becoming increasingly hostile towards us as Christians. Is that correct? The world is becoming increasingly hostile. The rulers and authorities in our world are becoming increasingly intent upon approving laws which actually make basic historical Christianity illegal. And that's just the trajectory that I'm highlighting. So what do we feel? What's our fundamental attitude towards our rulers and authorities? Hypothetical situation, but if you just happen to bump into Boris and he was in need, and he was in need, would you feel like, I know he's not our leader anymore, but would you feel like this is my enemy? What about if you bumped into Biden? Would you feel like I need to give him a piece of my mind? Or would you feel like I'm just looking for an opportunity to do good for this person? Now bear in mind that authority structures go from the very top and your chances of bumping into Boris or Biden or who's the latest prime minister? Rishi? Rishi? I didn't know, but you can't tell these days in case there's been a change in the last week. So I'm not likely to bump into Rishi Sunak anytime soon and I definitely have never bumped into Boris. 

I'm definitely not going to bump into Biden, certainly not in hard times on their case. But I may have to do with someone who's in local government. They're very ordinary people in local government who are actually above you in the authority structures that we live under, aren't they? They may be morally reprehensible. They may wear a flag that says that they're in favor of things that you think are a terrible, sinful abomination to your God. Do you think it was different from the Christians on Crete? What's your fundamental stance to that figure in authority? If you saw them, if you saw a need that they had, would you be looking, would you be itching to do them good, to serve them in some way, to meet that need? Do you see them on the other hand as your enemy? Do you see them because of their political views or because of their moral views? Have you come to see them as someone who you would like to, to use an internet phrase, slam? I mean, that's how it goes, isn't it? Go on Twitter for a short period of time, preferably no more than about 30 seconds, and you'll see so-and-so slams so-and-so and a link to a video of someone commenting on something that somebody else did, but they're slamming them. Would you look for an opportunity to slam that person? We'll talk about that next week when we deal with the idea of speaking against them, blaspheming them, slandering them. Would you be looking fundamentally, would you be ready for an opportunity to do good, to share, to meet a need, to do an act of kindness? Why would you have such a different attitude, such an otherworldly attitude towards people who are fundamentally hostile to Christianity and make life very difficult for you and could be responsible for sending you to prison one day? Why would you have such an attitude? Well, only if you saw them not as the enemy, but as the mission field, right? And let's just back up and ask this question, what do you think about people who are our rulers and our authorities and who are over us? What do you think about them? Do you think that there's been a terrible mistake, a cosmic accident, which led to them being above you? And actually, it's your job to tear them down from that position and to put someone better in their place? Or do you believe that God's providence has allowed them to be your ruler? That's the theology that you'll find in Romans chapter 13. 

If you believe it's a great cosmic accident, you might believe that they're your political opponent, they're your political enemy, and your job is to tear them down, to expose them, to speak against them, to try to rid the earth of such vermin. If, however, you've swallowed 1 Timothy 2 and you see them as the mission field, you're praying for their salvation. If you read Titus chapter 3 and verse 1, you'd be looking for an opportunity to do good to them, to help them, to help them. To them, to rulers, to authorities. You'd be like, what can I share with you? What can I give you? Do you know what? This has been revolutionary in the lives of Christians down through the centuries where Christians who understood that we're to do good to those who hate us would actually invite their persecutors into their home and share a meal with them, break down the walls of hostility with such acts of kindness, and see people broken and converted sometimes. This is revolutionary, isn't it? This is actually a passage that has the power to transform our fundamental stance towards those who are over us, who are our rulers and our authorities. That's kind of why I wanted to spend some time just highlighting it all to you. 

I need to stop there, but before I stop, I just need to correct a possible misunderstanding. I've been talking a lot about good works. A very good question for you for Wednesday night is to go away and say, well, what does it look like for us to be subject? What does it look like for us to be obedient to those who are our rulers and authorities? Stay away from the exceptions. We'll have a whole sermon on that when I've got time to prepare it later in this short series in Titus 3. It'll be good, and we can talk about the exceptions another evening. But let's talk about in our fellowship questions this week. Let's talk about how do we do this? How do we apply this? But let's also talk about how, what would it look like to be people who are just itching to do good, even to the rulers and authorities? I think one example of that, a good example of that is Grace Community Church during the riots in 2020 when people were tearing the cities down and launching really vicious attacks on the police themselves. 

And police are an authority structure, would you agree? Grace Community's response to that was to say the police are having to deal with riots and attacks focused on them. They are our authorities. We're going to open up the church campus and we're going to set out a whole bunch of free food and we're going to feed them and house them and pray for them and take care of them and give them a place where they can rest whilst they deal with these riots in downtown Los Angeles. And you know what, it really showed the police at that time that Grace Community Church and John MacArthur did not view the authorities as the enemy, but were looking eager to do some act of service towards them on a practical level. I mean that's just one good example, isn't it? We could play out all sorts of examples on Wednesday night. So what does it look like for us to look to do good to those who are an authority over us? I do need to clear up a potential confusion because I've been talking a lot about good works, okay? And possibly there's someone in the room, I don't know what you're all thinking, and you've walked in today and you're like, great. Where does that leave me? I'm evil. 

If people knew how bad I've been, I have no hope. There's just no way, there's no hope for me if it's about good works because this is me. If people could see me, they'd want to stone me in this building. Okay, let me just clear this up for you. You're thinking that you need to be good in order to be acceptable to God, in order to be saved. And the reality is salvation is not by works. Where's the other mention of works in Titus chapter 3? It's in verse 5, isn't it? Look at Titus chapter 3 verse 5, he saved us, not by works, which we did in righteousness. 

Now this is crucial, isn't it? Because you're tempted perhaps to think, if only I could be someone who did enough good works that God would see my good works and say that outweighs your bad works, then I would have a chance of going to heaven. But here I am, I've come to church and all this guy is talking about is good works and where does that leave me? Well, let me just give you some good news. Salvation is not by good works. It's by the savior. Who's the savior? Look at verse 6, whom he poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ our savior. It's Jesus going to the cross that pays for your sin. Is Jesus going to the cross with all his righteousness that makes his righteousness available to you as a gift? You can be good in God's sight, perfectly good in God's sight. 

The Bible calls that justified in God's sight. You can be good by receiving that righteousness as a gift by grace. It's salvation by grace, Ephesians 2, 8 and 9, not by works lest anyone should boast. That's as clear as a bell in the Bible. And if you're thinking, well, I'm a wretch, well, welcome to the club. Amazing grace. How sweet the sound that saved a wretch like me. 

I once was lost, but now I'm found was blind, but now I see. That's the story of salvation saved by grace. Praise God. And the Bible calls that a blessing. Saved by grace. Praise God. Maybe you're on the other end of the spectrum and you've come in here thinking, good, finally, someone's talking about good works. 

Right on preacher. That's the problem in the church. There's not enough emphasis on good works. If only people focused more on good works, then they'd understand that, you know, people like me, yeah, we get to go to heaven, but it's those people, those unholy people, they're, the problem is they're just not, they don't teach enough about good works. I'm just going to say, gulp, because that's so badly mistaken. You couldn't be further from salvation. The Pharisee thought like that. 

Remember the Pharisee and the tax collector? God, I thank you that I'm not like other men. I fast twice a week. I give a tenth of all I possess. I do this. I, I, I, it was all about him. There was a tax collector that stood at a distance and wouldn't even lift up his head, his gaze to heaven and he beat his chest and he said, God, be merciful to me, a sinner. Jesus said, this one went home justified before God rather than the other. 

If you're the Pharisee and you're thinking great, good works, I'm going to be more dedicated. I'm going to work hard. I'm going to go out tomorrow and do some more good works and then God will look at me and he'll say, look at you. You're a Pharisee. That's your problem. You're just trying to save yourself by your good works. You, my friend, are lost. 

You need to come like the sinner. You're not even seeing the seriousness of your own sin because if you did, you'd realize that you could never pay for it with all your good works. God's standards of perfection, your standards have come down to your level, maybe just a little bit higher than your level so it keeps you working, but you'll get there. No, you won't get there. You're actually on the road to hell with your efforts to be saved by good works. Both of those extremes, I'm such a wretch, I could never be saved. That's good works mentality. 

I'm almost there. I'm so good that I'm in with a very good chance. I'm going to work really hard. That's a works mentality. You have to repent of that because, can I say it any more plainly? I've talked a lot about good works because it says it here, but you're not saved by good works. Father, I pray that you would make that abundantly clear to anyone today who's tempted to rely upon their works or to despair because of the lack of them. Lord, we pray that you would be glorified, that you would save souls and that you would please sanctify us, change our attitudes towards authorities, towards rulers, help us Lord to see them as the mission field, not the enemy. 

Help us to love them and pray for them and seek to do good, help us to submit fundamentally and to obey fundamentally even when we have to disobey in certain instances and when we have to take a stance and be willing to suffer for you, Lord, we pray that it would never be as rebels, as people who are just disobedient in our nature and allow that to spill over in our attitudes towards authority. Lord, please give us a humble, submissive attitude to you and to the authorities that you providentially appoint in our lives. We ask it in Jesus' name, amen. All right, I have no idea how long I preached. I hope it wasn't too long. I opened my eyes and Mike had reappeared. That must mean that you were ready for me. 

. 