# “The Faithful Servant’s Hospitality” - Titus 1_7-8
 We are going to be back in Titus chapter 1 this morning, so please turn to Titus 1 in your Bibles. I'm going to read verses 5 through 8 again just to orient us back to our current place. Titus 1, 5 through 8. This is why I left you in Crete, so that you might put what remained into order, and so appoint elders in every town as I directed you. If anyone is above reproach, the husband of one wife and his children are believers and not open to the charge of debauchery or insubordination. For an overseer, as God's steward, must be above reproach. He must not be arrogant, or quick-tempered, or a drunkard, or violent, or greedy for gain, but hospitable, a lover of good, self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined. Let's pray. Heavenly Father, we continue our study through these verses, continue to see the standard that you set for all of us as your servants, and that you set apart certain men to be elevated to stewards and overseers of your church. As Tom has already said, we rejoice in your discipline, your loving care for us as a father to expose our weakness and our sin, to remind us of how humble we must be and how dependent we must be on you. God, it is clear from these verses that any of us who would be qualified must be dependent on you. Please help us to be dependent. Help us as we study today to be encouraged by your grace and enlivened towards pursuing faithfulness for your glory. Amen. Two spies have entered into enemy territory, but they're discovered. Someone hears that they're there, and so they run and they hide in someone's home. And the enemy's soldiers approach the home and bang on the door and ask their host if the spies are hidden within. And the host welcomes them in. She says, I do not know who you're speaking of. You can search my home. You will not find these men, because she had hidden the men up on the roof. Their host, a woman named Rahab, protected these spies, and they were able to escape and get back to the people of Israel. And when they did get back to the people of Israel, they were empowered to defeat Rahab's city. And Rahab and her family did not suffer the fate of their neighbors. They were rescued. They were saved. Another story. Three men approach a tent at the oaks of Mamre. A man bursts from the tent, an old man. He runs and he bows before them and he begs them, let me prepare you a meal. So they turn aside and they sit by the tent. And hours later, this old man and his wife have prepared food for these men. They've slaughtered a calf. They've made a meal. And now they sit and they enjoy the meal with these three strangers. And as they do, this old man, Abraham, gets into conversation and he asks the men why they are here and finds out that they're on their way to bring judgment upon the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah. And over this meal, Abraham is able to barter with these men and to encourage them to rescue both cities, if only for the sake of a few faithful people. And because of Abraham's hospitality, because of that shared meal, his cousin Lot and his family are rescued from the judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah. A third story. A Roman centurion sends a message. He sends a message to a man and asks this man to join him and his family for a meal at their house. The man agrees and he travels to the home of this powerful, gentile soldier. And he shares a meal with the family. But that's not all that he shares. This man was the apostle Peter. And over this meal, he doesn't just share food and fellowship, but he actually shares the gospel message which he had received from Jesus Christ. And if you know the story, this gentile family receives the good news of the gospel. And over this meal, their hearts are changed, they are rescued, and they receive the Holy Spirit. The feet of the events of Pentecost happen in this gentile home. Now what do all these stories have in common? Well, they demonstrate the power of hospitality. Hospitality. In each of these stories, someone is brought into someone else's home, and because of that, blessing abounds. The gospel is shared. People are saved. Hospitality is a central element of Christian ministry and practice. It's a specific way that throughout history, God has worked to bless the people who are a part of his story. And we'll see today that the faithful Christian, each of us in this room who would profess to be God's children, must practice hospitality. Now we're in our second week studying Titus 1, 7 through 8, and we've been looking at all these different characteristics, these different character traits of the man who would aspire to eldership in God's church. Now the church as God's household is full of his servants, but we know that God chooses to elevate some of those servants not to a position of greater worth than other servants, but a position of authority and responsibility, of stewardship. So last week we looked at the group of characteristics which we summarized as self-controlled. But today we're going to focus on the hospitality of the faithful servant. And I want us to make sure that as we do this, we examine ourselves. Don't examine others this morning. Don't look at these qualifications and start to look around the room and think of whether or not that person or that person or that person is hospitable. Focus on yourself. Focus on your own heart and see, do I add up? How can I grow? Because I'm convinced that as we study hospitality, we'll see ways that all of us have room for improvement. We're all going to learn something today. So here's the big idea. The big idea of my text, of my sermon today is that the faithful servant of Christ practices biblical hospitality. The faithful servant of Christ practices biblical hospitality. We're going to look at this in three points. First, we're going to see what hospitality means. When I say biblical hospitality, what am I talking about? What does the Bible think of when it thinks of hospitality? Second, what hospitality accomplishes. This is the why of hospitality. And finally, what hospitality looks like. We're going to actually get practical and think for a little bit about how we can practice hospitality. So first, let's define hospitality. Let's look at what hospitality means. Now in Titus 1 8, we see that it says, this man must not be all of these things, but hospitable. Now the word there, hospitable, is a translation of the Greek word that literally means stranger lover. Now where I come from in the United States, we have this thing called stranger danger. This is the opposite of stranger danger. Stranger lover. Now what does Paul mean when he uses this word? I think he means more than you might think. Now obviously, the stranger is a genuine threat. If you don't know someone, if you don't know their intentions, if you don't know what they're doing, then you should logically engage with them with a bit of self-protection in mind. Logically people treat strangers with suspicion. Now this was very true back in the times of the Bible, but specifically in Greece, as the Greeks began to expand their empire, they ran into a problem. As the Greeks themselves started being the strangers to other people, as they went to new countries and overtook them and tried to settle in them, they were experiencing all of that stranger danger feeling. They started to think about that, and they started to practice hospitality as a way to remove the threat. If I take a stranger and invite him into my home and treat him well, then I can undo the threat of the stranger. That was the thinking. And so over time, Greek thinking began to say that what makes you not a barbarian is to be hospitable. The Greeks prized hospitality. This word for stranger lover was a virtue among the Greeks. It meant I'm better than the average man because I'm going to treat a stranger with a bit of dignity, with a bit of trust. Now Jewish culture saw hospitality from a different perspective. Think of Leviticus 19, 33 through 34. It says, when a stranger sojourns with you in your land, you shall not do him wrong. You shall treat him, you shall treat the stranger who sojourns with you as the native among you. And you shall love him as yourself, for you were strangers in the land of Egypt. I am the Lord your God. See the law required the Jew to love the sojourner because they as a nation knew what it was like to be a stranger. They had been strangers in Egypt. And so that principle of loving your neighbor as yourself extended to loving your stranger, the stranger as yourself. Do you see that? So both Greek and Jewish cultures prized this form of hospitality, of bringing a stranger into your home and loving them. But there's a key difference between Greek and Jewish hospitality that we need to prioritize. Think of Acts 17. Paul comes to all these Greek philosophers and thinkers and they welcome him to share his beliefs. And they actually open themselves up to being convinced that he might believe something they need to believe. Now they want to potentially integrate his truth into their truth. Now this is the opposite of how the Jews handled hospitality. Religious integration, you know, was forbidden. Exodus 20, the Ten Commandments makes this simple. God says, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. So the Jews were to welcome the sojourner. They were to bring the stranger in and to take care of them, but never to welcome their religious beliefs, their idolatry, their different religion. There was a hard line. There was this big wall between them when it came to what you believe. Now over time, this, especially after the exile, this became hardened into the Jew-Gentile distinction. So the Jews realized that they had been sent into exile by God because they had not obeyed Exodus 20. They had followed other gods. And so Jewish culture became very, very careful, drawing sharp lines between Jew and Gentile to make sure that the Jews would not become tainted or unclean by false teaching. And it seems that by Jesus' time, the rabbis were very open to hospitality towards other Jews, but hospitality towards Gentiles was looked on with suspicion. It was dangerous. You're inviting in a potential to be confused, to be impure. So Gentiles could come to the Jews. They could come to the temple. They could worship. It was rare to see Jews and Gentiles mixing within the home. So what do we see when we talk about this stranger love? We see this love for a stranger that treats the stranger sympathetically, understands what it would be like to be in their position, and has the desire to help them, to serve them in their need. But there's a careful prohibition that you don't believe what they believe. Now what does hospitality look like in Bible times? When we talk about stranger love, what is the actual practical depiction? What does it mean to do this? Well, hospitality in the ancient Near East was incredibly sacrificial. Think about the stories of Abraham and Lot in Genesis 18 and 19. I open talking about Abraham when the three men come to his tent and he shows them hospitality. Now if you're like me, when you think about the patriarchs, when you think about Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, you think that they just kind of sit around in their tents looking at all their stuff, trying to be holy and wondering when God's promises are going to come true. That's not what's happening with Abraham. Abraham is the ancient equivalent of a man with multiple successful businesses. He's a busy, important man. So when you think of Abraham receiving these guests, you need to remember a couple things. First, he was busy. He's managing his household. He's not sitting around waiting for things to happen. He is active. Second, he sets all that aside because these men come. He doesn't know who they are. He just opens his life up to them, gets them in his home, and spends the rest of his day preparing a meal for them. This is extremely sacrificial. Abraham's an important guy. He could have said, guys, look, just stay over here. I'm going to get my servants to get you guys some juice boxes and some crackers and we'll send you on your way. But instead, he spends the rest of the day caring for them, showing them love, sacrificing his time. So what does that tell us about hospitality? It's very inconvenient. Abraham didn't have visit from God and two angels in his diary that morning. He spent the rest of his day making bread, killing a calf, skinning the calf, cooking the calf, and then feeding and hosting his guests. All of his other plans are off. Now in the next chapter, we see Lot practice hospitality in Genesis 19. Listen to Genesis 19, 1 through 3. The two angels came to Sodom in the evening and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he rose to meet them and bowed himself with his face to the earth and said, my lords, please turn aside to your servant's house and spend the night and wash your feet. Then you may rise up early and go on your way. They said, no, we'll spend the night in the town square. But he pressed them strongly. So they turned aside to him and entered his house and he made them a feast and baked unleavened bread and they ate. So these two angels who have just come from Abraham's hospitality now arrive at Sodom and Lot sees them and he says, come over to my house. And they say, no, no, no. He says, no, come over to my house. Get inside. Get inside right now. Why? Because he knows what happens to strangers in Sodom, right? The opposite of hospitality. And sure enough, that night at Lot's door, the men of Sodom are desperately trying to get in to abuse these guests. Now listen to what Lot says to the men of Sodom. Listen to this and think of it in the context of hospitality. Lot went out to the men at the entrance. Shut the door after him and said, I beg you, my brothers, do not act so wickedly. Behold, I have two daughters who have not known any man. Let me bring them out to you and to do to them as you please. Only do nothing to these men for they have come under the shelter of my roof. This is a horrifying statement. But understand the commitment to hospitality. These men have entered my roof that their safety, their protection is Lot's highest priority. In the biblical context, being hospitable is making a radical commitment to caring for others and specifically to caring for people who you don't even know. Now it's assumed that you would practice this kind of love for your friends and family, right? That's what I'm saying. If you're going to love a stranger like this, then of course your family is going to receive similar love. So perhaps one of the best ways to describe hospitality is you are making room in your family for those who aren't your family. You are making room in your family for those who aren't your family. You feed your family, you shelter your family, you care for your family, you provide what you can for your family. So you do for the stranger. That's biblical hospitality. So as you can see, hospitality involves a lot more than just having your mates over for the match, right? This is commitment. This is potentially painful. And we see here in our text that the faithful servant of God must practice hospitality. Now as we build out our understanding of hospitality, I want to look at a couple of the other qualifications in Titus 1. I think they're going to round out our understanding. Now they might not be what you expect, but I think that they really help us see elder qualification in the right light. So we're going to look at next that the elder must not be greedy for gain. This is in Titus 1.7. Now both Titus and 1 Timothy tell us the qualified shepherd of God cannot be greedy for gain. Now the old fashioned term here is filthy lucre. The idea behind this is you have manipulated, you have connived to get something that you shouldn't have had in the first place. This is through corruption, through deception, through manipulation. You should be able to see pretty clearly that someone who's going to lead the flock of God cannot be greedy for this kind of dishonest, immoral gain. And church history sadly has demonstrated over the centuries that time after time men are willing to get into a position of power in the church in order to satisfy their greed for this kind of gain. Their whole churches, whole denominations, whole movements based off of this greed. They do this by simple theft. They do this by teaching false doctrine. They do this by using their influence to manipulate the world. By using their influence to manipulate the people who trust them. Now God feels very strongly about this kind of leadership. Listen to what he says about the religious leaders of Israel who were greedy for dishonest gain in Ezekiel 34.10. Thus says the Lord God, behold I am against the shepherds and I will require my sheep at their hand and put a stop to their feeding the sheep. No longer shall the shepherds feed themselves. I will rescue my sheep from their mouths that they may not be food for them. God hates it when the leadership of his people abuses his people. The men who lead Christ's church cannot be greedy for dishonest gain. And this means that as a church tests its candidates it needs to be on the lookout for this kind of motivation, for this kind of temptation in a man. If a man is willing to do whatever it takes to get what he wants, he will not be a faithful steward of God's household. Can you see how a man who is greedy for unrighteous gain will not practice biblical hospitality? If hospitality is sacrificial, if it's unexpected, if it's lavish, if it's giving anything that you have and everything that you have, when someone needs it, someone who is greedy is not going to be inclined towards real hospitality. The hospitality of a man who is greedy for dishonest gain will look like one of two things. First, it will be political. The man who is greedy for dishonest gain will practice hospitality, but only towards the people who are going to get him closer to what he wants. Only towards the things that, the power or the wealth in the church. He's going to be showing the kind of partiality that James 2 tells us to reject. But second, the hospitality of a greedy man will be manipulative. I've experienced this myself. In a church I used to attend, there was a man who would practice hospitality. He would get you in your home. He would make you feel loved and cared for. And then later when he needed a favor, he would cash in on that hospitality. He would cash in on that help. Brothers and sisters, please pray that this kind of man never comes into leadership in our church. Now one way to test this is to look at the way the world sees this man. It's interesting that 1 Timothy tells us that an elder must have a good reputation amongst outsiders. Now, obviously, if you're preaching the gospel faithfully, you won't necessarily have a good reputation, right? But you should have a good reputation in other ways. And in general, the world is less trusting of people in the church. And so if a man is known in the business world for being cutthroat and deceptive, if he's known for being hard to pin down and slippery or ruthless and political, why should he be representing God's church? If a man, if the people in a greater community don't trust a man because they know he has no integrity, why would we in the church elevate him to a position of authority? A faithful steward must not be greedy for unjust gain. And hospitality, real biblical hospitality, is a huge proof that a man is not greedy for unjust gain. Do you see that? So third, the elder qualified man must not be a lover of money. This comes from 1 Timothy 3 verse 3. This is just another angle. Now, Paul writes that the elder qualified man will not be a lover of money. And the word literally means a not money lover. It's one word. And it's paralleled with stranger lover. So not a stranger lover, but a not money lover. This is more subtle than greed for dishonest gain. This isn't someone who's necessarily conniving and sneaky and manipulative. This is just someone who's in love with money, in love with wealth. Hospitality is the opposite of love for money. Now, Paul never says in here that an elder must be generous. He never uses that term because hospitality is generosity. If you're hospitable, you are generous. Now, love of money ties into self-control. A love of money is an enabler to the things we talked about last week, arrogance and gluttony. A lover of money cannot have the church's best interests in mind. So I'm not saying that when we talk about love of money, it's exclusive to the context of hospitality. But again, hospitality demonstrates that someone does not love their money. Do you love money? Do you love earthly wealth and all the things that it comes with, the trappings of money, the comfort, the ease? How do you know? Well, here's two tests for you. The first test, how do you compare yourselves to others, yourself to others? How do you think about people who are more wealthy than you? Do you look down on them? Because since they are rich, they must be more materialistic. They must not love their families. They must be compromised morally and ethically. If you're rich, there's something wrong with you. Friends, check your love. Believe the best of your brothers and sisters in Christ. How do you know this rich brother or sister is not giving in secret? Assume that your fellow Christians are practicing hospitality, practicing humble giving unless you see otherwise. So that's how you could compare yourself to the rich. What about comparing yourself to the poor? Do you assume they're lazy? Do you assume they must have made bad decisions, that they've gotten what they deserve? Again, check your love. Matthew 26, Jesus reminds us that we will always have the poor and you don't know the situation. You don't know the reasons. You don't know why. And honestly, it's not your business to know. It's your business to love them. God puts people with different amounts of opportunity and money inside the church to love one another, to help one another, to serve one another. Comparison is the thief of joy and it destroys love amongst brothers and sisters in the church. So if you want to know how you think about money, if you want to know if you love money, think about how you think about other people, how you compare yourselves to them. Now second, just think about how you actually think about your own money. If you're poor, then you can struggle to obsess about your money. You never know where the next dollar or sorry, pound is going to come from. How am I going to pay that next bill? How am I going to handle that next thing? What if something unexpected comes? The poor lover of money stops believing the words of Jesus in Matthew 6. Therefore, do not be anxious saying, what shall we eat or what shall we drink or what shall we wear? For the Gentiles seek after all these things and your heavenly father knows that you need them all. But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness and all these things will be added to you. So if you're poor, don't forget that your God knows your need and He loves you. And what if you're rich? Well, if you're rich, you can obsess about money because you're spending so much time managing it. You're spending so much time, it controls your thinking and your decision making and your time. The rich lover of money can forget that everything they have comes from the Lord. They would do wise to remember the parable of the rich fool who piled up his treasures but died before he could enjoy them. You don't know what God has planned for you and the rich person is often tricked into believing that they have that control. We spoke last week about how our culture has embraced gluttony as the goal of life. And love of money goes hand in hand with gluttony. When you have more money, you can give in to more indulgence. Do you spend your free time thinking about how to get or spend money? Do your dreams and fantasies revolve around the things you wish you had? Are your interactions with others characterized by jealousy and covetousness? As we noted last week, we have to be careful to keep the gifts of God in their proper place, right? Love of money replaces God as the highest good and as the gracious giver of all things and takes the gifts that he gives us and begins to idolize them. A man who leads God's church cannot be characterized by love of money. So hopefully you can see why I've combined these characteristics together. To be faithful at biblical hospitality will require a sacrifice of your financial plans and your comfort. Those who love money and manipulate for it will fail to practice hospitality. And as our definition of the elder qualified servant grows, these characteristics start to mix with the commands not to be arrogant and gluttonous and to practice self-control. So I think it will bless us now as we've defined hospitality. I want to spend a few minutes thinking about it more, meditating about it more. And I want to answer the questions, what is hospitality capable of? And why does God expect it for his people? Why does God expect us to be hospitable? So having understood what hospitality means, let's go to our next point. What hospitality accomplishes? What does hospitality accomplish? Well, hospitality accomplishes gospel ministry. When you practice hospitality, you can generate, participate in, and contribute to the work of the gospel. I want to look at a few instances in scripture where hospitality contributes to the spread of the good news. In Mark 2, verses 1 through 3, it says, and when Jesus returned to Capernaum after some days, it was reported that he was at home. And many were gathered together so that there was no more room, not even at the door, and he was preaching the word to them. So in this instance, Jesus goes on to heal the paralytic man. He calls the Pharisees to repentance. And the result is that the people are all amazed and they glorify God. So in this story, Jesus opens up his home and lets it just get filled to the brim, filled so much that someone needs to go up on the roof and cut a hole in the roof to get one more person in. When you have people in your home, as Jesus did, you generate opportunities to proclaim truth. Third John expands on this. John wrote his third letter to a man called Gaius, and he commends Gaius for his faithful ministry of hosting missionaries who were traveling about the region to spread the gospel. Listen to what he writes in 3 John 5-8. Beloved, it is a faithful thing you do in all your efforts for these brothers, strangers as they are, who testified to your love before the church. You will do well to send them on their journey in a manner worthy of God, for they have gone out for the sake of the name, accepting nothing from the Gentiles. Therefore we ought to support people like these that we may be fellow workers for the truth. When Gaius hosts missionaries, he becomes a fellow worker. He joins the missionary work. You might not be called to ministry. You might not be called to go overseas, but as you host the work of people in ministry, as you host missionaries in their travels, you become a fellow worker, you are enabling their ministry. Now for some of us, our jobs, our life stages, our family situations don't allow us to participate in the teaching or spreading of the gospel like we might prefer. But God might be creating the opportunity for you to generate gospel ministry just in hosting, just in being hospitable. Now back in Mark 2, we actually see another instance of hospitality with Jesus. It's a few verses later, and what happens is Jesus has left his home, it's the next day, and he's walking along the sea and he meets Levi, the tax collector. And he invites Levi to join him, and Levi does, which is a miracle in and of itself, but then Levi says, come back to my house for dinner. And so Jesus did. Jesus enters the home of Levi and shares a meal with what the book of Mark calls sinners and tax collectors, the underbelly of society. The worst kind of people come to Levi's home and they hear Jesus share the good news of the gospel. Now this was unacceptable to the religious leaders. You remember I said at the beginning that the Jewish culture at the time had said you shouldn't bring sinners and gentiles and these kinds of people into your home because you are entering into a place where you'll be unclean. But Jesus doesn't have this fear. They challenge him and he says those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners. You see when you practice hospitality, you break down barriers between believers and unbelievers. You create opportunities that wouldn't otherwise exist. And in this case, Jesus is receiving hospitality. He's going into someone else's home. He's invited into a home that the normal Jew would say, no, no, no, sorry, I'm not going to go in there. He says, yeah, let's do it. Let's go in. And then he shares the truth. Bringing people you disagree with into your home naturally breaks down barriers, naturally opens opportunities for discussion and demonstration of the gospel. This is especially true in Acts 10. This is the story I mentioned in the introduction when Peter goes into the home of Cornelius the centurion. Cornelius was a Gentile. He was a God feerer and God told Peter, go to his home and accept the invitation for hospitality. Now Peter tells them when we're here, you know how crazy it is that I'm even in your house right now. This is madness. Only because of the good news of Jesus Christ am I in this room sharing a meal with you. God used Peter's faith, his commitment to accepting hospitality to proclaim the good news to Gentiles for the very first time. Hospitality was the impetus for the gospel reaching the Gentiles. What would it look like if you invited people into your home who you generally distrust, people who you disagree with? What if after sharing the gospel with someone you meet on the street or someone you sit next to on the train, you actually welcome that person to your house for further discussion and food? What if you had someone over who represents sin that you disagree with? Someone from the LGBT community. What if you tried to establish a relationship with someone who's living in open sin? Now if this sounds scary to you, I'm telling you this is what stranger love looks like. There's a book that came out a few years ago called Secret Thoughts of an Unlikely Convert. It's by a woman called Rosaria Butterfield. If you don't know her story, you should just listen to the book or read the book, but Rosaria Butterfield was formerly a lesbian activist and a queer studies professor in the United States. But a pastor in her community started welcoming her into his home and sharing meals with her and sharing the gospel with her for over and over and over and over again. And through that hospitality, through that love, she was led to Christ. What if you really got to know your neighbors? These things are counter-cultural, but that doesn't mean we should avoid them. Remember, hospitality is specifically the love of the stranger and the sojourner. When you practice it, you display the gospel and then you can share the gospel. Now hospitality, as the Bible describes it, does refer to the stranger and the sojourner, but obviously, as I've already said, that doesn't mean we don't practice it towards our brothers and sisters in Christ. If you're practicing hospitality to strangers, you must practice it with your church family. When you practice hospitality, you bring people into your life, you bring people into your home and you can do more gospel ministry with fellow believers. You can encourage those who are struggling and hurting. You can show generosity to the needy. You can exhort and challenge people who are trapped in sin. When Christians practice hospitality, we encourage one another. We do the work of the gospel in the context of the church. So when you gather with other believers, make sure that you do so with some intentionality. Hospitality towards other Christians is wasted if it doesn't include genuine fellowship. If you're regularly getting together with other Christians, but you're not praying together, worshiping together, challenging one another, sharing your sins and your struggles and your weakness with one another, you aren't doing the job. You're wasting an opportunity. Now does that mean that every time you get together with fellow Christians, it must be a serious somber time of prayer and reflection on sin? No, no, no. That's not what I'm saying. Okay? Get together, have a barbecue, watch the game, stay up late talking and enjoying one another, but don't waste an opportunity to glorify God together. Why would two people who are saved by Jesus get together and not find a way to share that, to celebrate that, to be thankful for that? What a waste. So the first thing that hospitality accomplishes is gospel ministry to believer and to unbeliever. Why does it do that? Well, that's because second, hospitality is sacrificial love. When you practice hospitality, you've taken from what you have, whether it's money or material possessions or shelter or food or even just your time, and you share it with those who need it more than you. This is where we see hospitality come into conflict with love of money or greed for dishonest gain. Hospitality is essentially sacrificial. It's about setting aside our own priorities and preferences and schedules and finances for the sake of others. Are you budgeting for a home someday? Are you budgeting for your child's university education? Are you budgeting so that you can be hospitable? So you just have someone over without hurting? See, hospitality is a way that we as the church help one another. God provides for others through the church at large. Right now there are people in this church, in this room, who are benefiting from the hospitality of others. People who would have no hope except for what God has done through his church. God has blessed some of us abundantly. At some point the hospitable person uses what they have to serve others. Paul commands this in Romans 12-13. He says, contribute to the needs of the saints and seek to show hospitality. Paul says, contributing to the needs of the saints is not just giving them money and leaving them to it. It's getting them in your home. It's encouraging them. It's loving them. It's sharing sacrificially. The hospital heart hears of a need and says, how can I help? What can I give? What can I let go of? Now the word that is used for hospitality here is the same word. So Paul says, contribute to the needs of the saints and seek to show stranger love to the saints. It's not just the people in the church that you know. It's that same standard of hospitality towards others in the church. And Galatians 6 tells us we should prioritize one another in our attempts to love and serve and help one another. Galatians 6, 9, and 10 says, let us not grow weary of doing good for in due season we will reap if we do not give up. So then as we have opportunity, let us do good to everyone and especially to those, especially to those who are of the household of faith. Here's a way to think of it. The person who is greedy for dishonest gain is opportunistic. Maybe you've met someone like this or you've seen someone like this on TV. They're always looking for a way to get something out of the situation they're in, right? This is that person who's just a little bit slimy. What are you doing? It's always about them getting something extra out of it. Well, the heart of the Christian is also opportunistic, but it's seeking for opportunities to do good, to sacrifice, to hurt for others. Are you always scheming for ways to bless your brothers and sisters? Do you see new money come in that wasn't expected and say, finally I can get that new toy or finally I can bless someone? When we practice hospitality, we practice sacrificial love. We look for ways to take from the abundance we have and give from that abundance to those who need it, Christian or not. And then we get to see the gospel work take place. So hospitality accomplishes gospel ministry through the practice of sacrificial love. But there's one more thing we need to ask. Why do we do this? Ultimately, our final point about what hospitality accomplishes is this. Hospitality imitates God. When you practice hospitality, you get to show others and share with others what God has shared with you. Hospitality is in many ways one of the most profound illustrations of the ways in which God changes the heart of the believer. The kind of hospitality the Bible expects, we've seen it's sacrificial, it's intentional, it's personal, it's providential. You don't know what God's going to do, but you open yourself up to those opportunities, right? Where do we see that kind of hospitality practiced? From our God. As David says in Psalm 23 verse 5, you prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies. You anoint my head with oil. My cup overflows. Our God has blessed us richly with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places. Are you inclined? Are you motivated? Are you desperate to imitate him, to show the love that he's shown you? The hospitable person sees all that they have as a gift of God. They understand that whatever they have, they must steward for the sake of God's glory. This means they're inclined not to build their castle, not to perfect their kingdom. Instead, they want to turn the blessings of God outward so that anyone they can bless, they will bless. Remember, we said hospitality is about bringing people who aren't your family into your family. Friends, do you see it? Do you see the gospel? 1 John 3, 1. See what kind of love the Father has given to us that we should be called children of God, and so we are. God has made us his children. He has brought us into his family, into his home. And you know, Christian, you were not his child at first. You were lost in your sin, dead in your trespasses, in love with the world and the lust of your heart. But God, as the adoptive Father, sought us out. Ephesians 1 says, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in Christ with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places, even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love. He predestined us for adoption to himself as sons through Jesus Christ according to the purpose of his will. Christian, God came and found you in your sin, and he set you apart to be his child. And you weren't the kind of person who you'd want to bring into the household of God. We were dirty, wretched, we were filthy, we hated God, but he brings us into his home. And he does so through his Son. John 1, 12 through 13 says, but to all who did receive him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God who were born not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. For those of us who have received new hearts and can now believe in him, we have been added to the adoptive family of God. We believe in the name of Jesus, the God who became man, who descended from heaven and came to live a human life. When he came here, he set aside all his heavenly glory so that he could experience your humanity. He did not expect to be served as he deserved, but he served others. And the ultimate service was his sacrifice. Jesus died killed by his own father as the sacrifice necessary so that you and I could be adopted, so that you and I could be welcomed into the household of God. Because when he died, the debt that we owed was paid with his blood. And when God resurrected Jesus, he showed that his Son, the Christian's brother, had defeated death so that we could join God's family for eternity. John Peter 1 says, blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ. According to his great mercy, he has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled and unfading, kept in heaven for you who by God's power are being guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. When you're a part of God's family, you receive all of the blessings of being in his family. All that Jesus has is God's Son, he gives to us as adopted brothers and sisters. We have fellowship with God and with his Son, Jesus Christ. When we practice hospitality, we are doing the same thing. Do you see that? We find those who are in need of help. We take what we have, the things that we would naturally give to those that we love and we give it to them. We do this even though it hurts, even though it's unexpected, even though it's inconvenient because we want to imitate the love of the Father. So what does hospitality accomplish? It accomplishes the gospel. Through taking every opportunity to live sacrificially like our Father did, hospitality puts the glory of the good news of the gospel on display. Now, unbeliever, just briefly, do you see the beauty of the love of God? When we talk about the gospel, we're not talking about another religion, another set of rules and regulations to live by so that you can achieve salvation. We're talking about a loving God who practices sacrificial hospitality to bring in those who are strangers, those who hate him so that they can be loved and they can know eternal life. That's the good news of the gospel. So if you're outside the home now, repent. The world does not offer you such welcome, such hope, such hospitality, but God does. Ask him to give you a new heart. Now, Christian, do you see why we practice hospitality? Can you see the picture of the gospel that's on display? Do you want to practice that? Do you want to live a life that puts the faith in the gospel that you must have on display? Do you want to show the love that God's shown you to others? It's not just a task or a duty or another thing that we need to do regularly so we show that we're a good Christian. It's a loving demonstration of the gospel. It's motivated by your desire to imitate God's love for you. And this is why in Matthew 25, Jesus equates sacrificial love of the redeemed with love for him. Listen to what he says, Matthew 25 verse 34. Then the king will say to those on his right, come, you who are blessed by my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world, for I was hungry and you gave me food. I was thirsty and you gave me drink. I was a stranger and you welcomed me. I was naked and you clothed me. I was sick and you visited me. I was in prison and you came to me. Then the righteous will answer him saying, Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you or thirsty and give you drink? And when did we see you a stranger and welcome you or naked and clothe you? And when did we see you sick or in prison and visit you? And the king will answer them, truly I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, so you did it to me. The encouragement is that when we practice hospitality towards one another, we practice love for our savior. We imitate the father. We put the gospel on display. And the warning is that if we don't do that, we're rejecting our savior. You see why we practice hospitality. It accomplishes so much. So the question before us now is what does it look like? We need to spend a few minutes thinking how do we put hospitality into practice? So there's a few things that hospitality looks like, a few things that hopefully will encourage you as you seek to practice hospitality. First, hospitality is simple. The heart behind hospitality is just a heart that wants to love sacrificially. Remember, we said it's an opportunistic heart. It's not supposed to be perfect. It takes opportunities as they come and responds with that sacrificial love. When Abraham practiced hospitality in Genesis 18, he's just throwing a meal together. Now it's lavish because he had much that he could give, but he didn't plan for it. He didn't prepare in advance. He just responds simply with getting what he can get and putting it together. Now one danger in our motive to be hospitable is we can weave our pride into our hospitality. Hospitality can become our chance to show off our home, to show off our gifts or our cooking skills or our taste. But the heart, the humility at the core of hospitality should arrest that pride. You must be humble in your hospitality. It could be an extravagant seven course meal and if you can do that, please invite me over. But it can also just be beans on toast. It can be a bowl of cereal. It can be McDonald's. The heart is what matters here. Don't let your expectations affect your ability to host. Just get people into your lives so you can love and serve them. Simple hospitality glorifies God just as much as lavish hospitality. You need to believe that. Hospitality is motivated by simple, earnest, opportunistic desire to love people who need love. Now second, it's adaptive. If hospitality is simple, it must be adaptive. It doesn't happen on our own terms. It happens on God's terms. When you practice hospitality, you need to let go of your control. Let the Lord bring about unexpected opportunities. You don't say, yes, I practice hospitality and this is how I do it. Every Tuesday, that is the only day I practice hospitality. My home is open from seven to nine and this is what I serve. If you want hospitality, this is where it is. You come and get it yourself. That's not hospitality. Right? I only host people who I know are safe. People who I can trust. I only host when my family is ready for it. No, you say I'm ready to host God bring me opportunities. It could be neighbors. It could be friends from work. It could be classmates, church family, refugees, missionaries, enemies. Hebrews 13 two says, do not neglect to show hospitality to strangers for thereby some have entertained angels unawares. Now that's specifically referring to lots hospitality and Sodom. He didn't know these guys were angels. He was just trying to protect them. The heart behind hospitality isn't a heart of control. It's a heart of love for God. And it's a heart that has faith that God will sovereignly allow good things to happen when we have that heart. If you can only host someone, if you've had six months to prepare for it, you probably need to work on this. And if it takes you six months to recover from hosting someone, you're probably overdoing it. Okay. Now, this also means that you don't need to have an abundant amount to be a good host. Some of us in this church don't have homes or we live with family or roommates. How are we supposed to practice hospitality? Or maybe, you know, we're in London, you've got about eight square feet to work with for your hospitality efforts. But we can still demonstrate a hospitable spirit. Right? I've already said that an elder qualified man doesn't need to be married or have kids. He can still demonstrate the qualification through his behavior. Well, Jesus didn't have a home. And he practiced hospitality. He accepted hospitality. He made the most of the opportunities that were given him. Think of the upper room. This last time he meets with his disciples. And we have John 13 through 17, these precious, precious chapters of scripture describing what went on in that room. That was Jesus accepting the hospitality of someone else. So if you don't have the space, you can still accept the hospitality. But are you sacrificial? What do you have to offer? Maybe you don't have the space to bring people into your home. But what do you have? Do you have time? Are you eager to serve the needy and the helpless? You might not be able to bring them into your home, but maybe you can give them the food that they need. Right? Maybe you can take them somewhere. You have a heart to serve, so serve. Find a way to do it. Be opportunistic. Don't let your pride cause you to miss out on the chance to serve others. Gospel ministry happens when we love sacrificially. So get over to people's houses. Accept the invitation. Even if it means your kids are going to be up late and they're going to be tired the next day, just make it work. Now, let me qualify this with the next point. Hospitality is adaptive, but it's also seasonal. There are times of life when you are poised for lots of hospitality, lots of sacrificial love. If you don't have kids in the home, you've got a big home, you've got lots of space, fill it with people in this room. Right? Fill it with your church family. But if you're single and you live with your mom in a studio flat, okay, you're probably not practicing hospitality right now. It probably doesn't make a lot of sense. If you have a newborn, maybe you shouldn't invite 40 people over for Bible study. Now, if you want to, that's, you know, you're free to, but maybe this is not the time for it. If you have young children, you probably shouldn't be inviting people over four or five nights a week because you need time to be with your family, to shepherd your children. See, the point is that hospitality is very practical. The heart behind hospitality is opportunistic, but it's also realistic. You should not go bankrupt feeding people. Okay? You shouldn't break your family apart by filling your home at the wrong times. Be sacrificial, be zealous, but also be realistic about your life stage. Be realistic about your weakness. Maybe this is a season for you to accept hospitality and not to give it as much. Because here's the last thing, hospitality is painful. It's painful. If it wasn't, then Peter wouldn't write this in 1 Peter 4 verse 9. Show hospitality to one another without grumbling. The biblical hospitality that we're talking about here is sacrificial. It hurts, right? It takes time, it takes money, your schedule is out the window, you are loving people and it hurts. It's not easy. It comes when you don't expect it. It involves sacrificing your comfort and your security, and it involves dealing with difficult or suffering people. So be ready. Invite that person in, and it might be painful, it might hurt, that's okay. Peter tells us not to grumble. Now just a final thought, don't despair. Do you struggle to show hospitality? Are you anxious about having people in your home? Are you confused about how to practice this? Well don't despair, our modern western culture has not equipped you to be hospitable. We don't do hospitality here. There's a lot to learn, there's a lot of patterns and habits and expectations that we need to change. And living in a big city does make it tricky, right? There are practical elements that mean that this is challenging, but those shouldn't be excuses. We should be committed to learning, committed to trying. Because remember it's simple. Just learn, just commit to growth. Ask the Lord for strength. Don't despair if you see that you're not good at this, if you see that you struggle with this. Don't give up, depend on the Lord, ask him for wisdom. I can tell you that we have been encouraged in our almost a year of being here by the heart for hospitality that people display. It looks different, and it's not easy, but keep striving. Don't give up. Hospitality is simple, it's adaptive, it's seasonal, and it's painful, and it is so, so, so worth it. The power of hospitality cannot be understated. We opened this sermon, I just gave you a few stories from the Bible showing what can happen when people are sacrificially hospitable. But there are countless more stories in the Bible and in church history, and I'm sure in each of your lives, of how God has used hospitality to bless His church. The servant of God, the faithful servant of God, practices hospitality. When we practice hospitality, we imitate our Father by inviting people to share in the love that we give to our family. When we practice hospitality, we demonstrate sacrificial love by putting our plans and our preferences aside for their sake. And when we practice hospitality, we get the opportunity to administer the hope of the good news of Jesus Christ to believer and to unbeliever. We can continue to grow in this discipline as a church, and God with His Holy Spirit will help us grow. Do you want to grow in this? Do you want to be hospitable? Do you want to show the gospel love that God showed you towards others? Let's pray and let's ask God to help us become hospitable. Lord Jesus, thank you for being sacrificial. Thank you for setting aside your comfort and your glory so you could do what it takes to get us into your home. Jesus, without your sacrifice, none of us would know the hospitality of the Father. I pray that you would help us. I pray that you would encourage us and strengthen us as a church to fight against the cultural current which is not hospitable. That we would seek ways to get each other into our homes and into our lives. That we would love one another. And Lord, that we would also love the stranger. That we would show sacrificial, intentional, personal love towards anyone who you'd bring into our lives so that we can imitate you and bring glory to you. Lord, use our homes, use our desire for sacrificial love to spread your gospel around this city. Make us instruments of your kingdom's growth. Help us to use what you've given, not for our own comfort, our own security, our own pleasure, but for the pleasure of the King, for the pleasure of our adoptive Father. Lord, we thank you for your love for us. Help us to show it to others. In your name we pray. Amen.