# ＂Faithful” or “Believing” in Titus 1_6？ Q&A Session after the Midweek Study
 I'm going to start with one that was sent in previously and then we'll kind of bounce back and forth. That cool with everybody here? Okay. And we are receiving them as we go. So I am curating some questions. We'll make the cut. That's not because we don't love you. And maybe some of the questions in this room will make the cut. So make sure you ask it well. No pressure. So one of the questions that we got, I'm going to summarize it. And it's from, it's based off of an argument MacArthur makes in his sermon. One of the points that MacArthur makes is that in 1 Corinthians 7, Paul says that we shouldn't divorce our unbelieving spouse if they consent to live with us. Because we could, Paul says, sanctify them by continuing to live with them. And the correlation there that he makes then is that also that the children would be holy. So the question is based on that, it seems that Paul is making the argument that if you live with someone, you can sanctify them, you can make them holy. So how can we be making the argument as people who would take a different view that you can't save someone? Or Tom, as you said that the faithful use of means does not guarantee that someone would be saved. So it seems that in that text, Paul is making the argument that a faithfully lived life of a Christian within a home does yield salvation. So do we say that it does? And if so, and if not, why would Paul make that argument? It's a really good question. I think the answer is yes and no. So yes, God uses means, very obviously. Parents are supposed to be faithful. And there is a connection to be made between the faithful use of means and you would hope God would use those means. One of those means would be prayer, right? And we say God answers prayer. But can you make the leap then between that and saying all children of elders or prospective elders must be saved? Well, no, because nothing in 1 Corinthians 7 guarantees that the children will be saved. In fact, Paul's very explicit in saying he's not guaranteeing it. It's very helpful actually, because when this came up, I think you sent it in earlier, or somebody sent it in earlier. And I said to Mike in the office, can you have a look in the 1 Corinthians commentary? Because I'm sure MacArthur there contradicts that point. And the point he makes in the 1 Corinthians 7 passage in that commentary is not to contradict per se the point that he is making, which is it's normal. You normally with both believing parents, we should all things being equal. If both parents are believers and they're faithful, well, it should have an impact on a generation of children rising up, right? That's what you would hope for. That's normal. That's what God's designed. But he does make the point in 1 Corinthians 7 when he comments it to say that it's not guaranteed. Yeah, go for it. So there's a lot that he says, but the summary that he makes is it's not that their salvation, that is the children in the home, is assured, but that they are protected from undue spiritual harm and that they receive spiritual blessing. Because they share in the spiritual benefits of their believing parent, they are holy. Often the testimony of the believing parent in this situation is especially effective because the children see a clear contrast to the unbelieving parent's life, and that leads them to salvation. So he says clearly that it is helpful, it is powerful, but it is not guaranteed that holy there does not mean saved, does not mean generated. Yeah, indeed. So the point he makes in his sermon on Titus 1 6 is basically to argue that for elders there's a special grace given to ensure that all the children of elders are then saved. So he's basically extending from that and saying, but in elders, well then they're all going to be saved. And, and that's just a leap that I can't make with him. So exactly. So let me just repeat that for the sake of people listening. MacArthur saying, if God wants you to be an elder, God will save all your children. Yeah, it is what he says. And, and you know, that's going to say, I said this to Adam and I said, God can do anything. I said this to Adam and Mike earlier. I totally admire his willingness to take what he believes the text says and to just live with it. Just don't care. Don't care who he friends, doesn't care who, who's, who's upset with him, who's doesn't care even about the awkward complications because there are lots of awkward complications with that position. And he's just going to say, look, this is what I believe the text says. This is what we'll do. Now, I think I'm saying exactly the same. I'm just saying I disagree over what the text says and respectfully, I love the guy. I just can't agree that that's the right interpretation of this text. And we have to let that fall where it may. You know, perhaps more than anyone. We've talked more about this with you personally than with anyone else. And you know that we're not going to be swayed to believe what we don't believe the text says. Let the chips fall where they may. Whatever the consequences are, we have to follow the text. Even if there are painful consequences for us. Sure. Yeah. And, and, and members of his own elder board and members of the seminary professors, they don't all agree. So you have to admire his faithfulness to be willing to just stick with what he believes the text says. And the whole argument has not been to try to tear my friend down. That's the one thing I tremble at more than anything in all of this is that someone could take this and use it to say, Oh, you know, look, he's got it wrong. I'm not interested in that. I'm not. And I would shy away from that kind of a debate because you know that I admire him more than most. Um, but we just have to follow what the text says. Thank you. Let's take a question from the audience. If anyone would like to manual. Uh, I actually wrote it down. I wanted to ask if at grace community church where McCarter is the head pastor. Yes. Okay. Do they apply this principle when they choose their own elders? Yes. Okay. So based on that, I wanted to say that I went on their website where they have listed a number of 39 elders. And if we assume that each elder has two children, that will be a total of 78 children. For the sake of this example, we can drop the number to a number of 50 children. According to statistics on church abandonment in the USA, the chance of at least one child of those 50 to stop being a believer is quite high. Could this also be considered an argument against the usage of word believer? Although it's not directly based on biblical evidence. No, I don't think so because they would just take that as it said, as it said. And if one of the elders children denied the faith, that elder would step down. And that's happened. And they would apply that consistently and just say, if an elder's child denies the faith or if an elder's child is behaving wildly, that elder must just step down. And they do that, praise God. You can see that in the history of the church where elders have had to step down for a period of time. They've paid attention to their families. Children have been brought back into line. And they've been able to take up their position as an elder again. So I would say I don't think that in itself is an argument against the translation. That's a practical issue. A question from, again, that was sent in and I'm summarizing it. But if an elder has younger children who are under the age of accountability but still defiant and strong willed, is he disqualified? If he's working diligently to shepherd them, is he qualified? So he's got young kids. Under what we would say is obviously the age of accountability, which again you've referenced we can't pin down. But if they're still in his home, still under his authority, and they're out of control and he is working diligently to put them under his control, is he disqualified? I think it would depend how you define out of control. Obviously if everyone looking at that just says, boy, that elder's kids are all out of control, there's a big problem, isn't there? What you're looking for in all of this is direction and commitment and pursuit. We're not looking for perfection. So if you look at one incident on a Sunday morning when one elder's child has a meltdown and you say that elder is unqualified because of that, God have mercy on your soul because he's going to measure to you with the same measure that you use and you're in trouble. If you can't give grace to parents who are struggling to control their children, you've got no idea what parenting is about at all. We've had one very compliant, very easy girl and I've watched people who've had four children and they're all steady, easy rides and then number five comes along and it's like nightmare in nappies and the nightmare in nappies turns out to tantrums in the supermarket and they've just got their work cut out to learn for the first time how to deal with a really strong willed, really troublesome child. But if you look at the overall pattern of their parenting, you say, oh no, they've got their kids under control. They're fighting to control that one and it's coming but they've got some troubles. You wouldn't look at a situation like that and say, no, you're going to say look at the trajectory. But the description is pretty stark, isn't it? Keeping or having, holding the children in submission or subjection. They've got to be in subjection. It's reflection on the pastor, if the father cannot bring his children under control and that's not something that happens in a moment, is it? Discipline and instruction of the Lord, raising them in that. That's something which happens progressively over time. If he can't do that, well then he shouldn't be caring for the household of God. So I would definitely say in answer to the question, you'd have to watch it. That's where you have to trust also that your elders are watching, that kind of thing. You've got to realize that we're serious about that and if you see stuff that we don't see, bring it to our attention. But it's not the kind of thing where you'd look at someone's behavior one Sunday and make a decision. I think that's simple. Any other questions from out here? Yeah, Shayun. We'll have... Let's grab a mic so that folks at home can hear. I was going to ask if a church has an elder on the elder board and their children are out of control and the pastor in the church, the other elders are aware of it and they haven't done anything about it, is it a legitimate reason to find a new church home or would you say not to? Does that make sense? Yeah, I would want to know why. I think you'd want to go and see the elders about something like that. In that situation, you'd want to go and talk to them. You may find out when you talk to them... Imagine totally different scenario. Imagine one of the elders was having, let's say, just depression. Serious ongoing depression would be enough of a reason to step aside from being an elder for a period of time. You may look at someone like that and you just cast stones, but if you went and talked to that person, you might know a little bit more about what's going on. If you talked to the other elders and said, has anyone spoken to Elder Fred because he seems really sad to me? They said, boy, yeah, you have no idea how much of a load he's carrying. Here's a description of what Spurgeon went through and the depression that Spurgeon faced. Before you disqualify him as an elder, just know that we're working hard with him. We've got it under control. We're watching things and we are well aware of the need perhaps for him to step aside, but for now we actually have chosen not to. Okay, well, that's a decision then for the elder board, isn't it? Under those circumstances, you'd say, I'm just going to have to trust my elders. If the rest of them are in good state and you can trust them, I wouldn't walk away from that church at that point. I would say, no, I'm going to trust them. That's their responsibility. I'm going to trust them. I hope that helps. Comparable situation. On the opposite extreme, one of the elders is having an affair. Everybody knows it. The other elders know about it, but they're not doing anything about it. What do you do? It's pretty obvious, isn't it? Say again? You leave that church. Well, one of the elders' children is the music director and he's sleeping around and everybody knows it, but the pastor's not dealing with it. What do you do? Then you don't just walk away. You shout loudly and walk away. That's when you say, this is wrong. Hello, help. Out of here. Who's godly? Come with me. Anyway. Can I just comment? As you do these hypotheticals, which most of the questions generally revolve around, a lot of it comes back to it ultimately depends on the situation and on the church and on the elders. Just like Tom's saying, how are they handling it? What's the background? What's the story? It's pretty hard to have a hypothetical and make a general response. As we have thought about this and as you think about this, the general principles are what Tom has just spent the last hour and a half explaining. Then it's up to the elders to take those principles and bring them to bear on these situations. It's not going to be the same response every time. It's going to be up to the elders and they're going to be held responsible for the decision they make. It's very helpful, thanks. So here's another question that was sent in. If Titus 1.6 means trustworthy, loyal, and submissive, and not a believer, could you paint a picture of what it would look like in an adult child of an elder who rejects the gospel? Would they simply need to be a hardworking, law-abiding citizen, for example? How would you go on to define that? Wow. I think there's a difference between outright rejection of the gospel and... So let's say your child is in your home and they are arguing against the truthfulness of the gospel. At what point do you not confront them about that as a father? Let's say your 18-year-old child is in the youth group at church saying, I don't believe this. This is just... My teacher at school taught me evolution and I believe that. I don't believe in God. Start their own TikTok account, walking along the road, telling everyone why their dad's wrong. At what point do you not confront your child at that point? If you're confronting your child and they're refusing and they're just rejecting everything you say, at that point they're outright rebellious, aren't they? To me, at that point, that would make me want to say, you're in my home, buddy. You better stop that right now. They've got to be in subjection. They've got to be in submission. So that's where I would maybe disagree with the idea that adult children don't have to obey their parents. When you're 18, you don't have to stop obeying your dad if you're living in the home. If your dad says, hey son, that stops and that stops now, and you say, stuff it dad, I'm out. I'm not having any of that. Well that's clear, isn't it? That's clear. You're then wild and rebellious. You just totally... You won't hear your parents. That's Deuteronomy 21. I do believe that is a different scenario when years later, an adult child totally rejects the gospel and sets up against it. What I can't get away from in my own head is the idea that that brings some kind of reproach. What I also can't get away from is the dividing nature of the gospel. We had this discussion earlier. If you're faithful as a Christian and your child is unsaved, are they going to be comfortable living in that environment? It's going to divide, isn't it? Truth divides. So there's going to be difficulty. But that's different from a situation like, let's paint this situation. Your 18-year-old daughter goes off to college and comes home and she's like, oh man, I'm really struggling. I've never encountered these arguments about evolution before. I've got some doubts going on. I'm just not sure what I believe now. I'm trying to work it out. I don't know if I believe it. She's not out sleeping around. She's not out drinking. She's still willing to listen. She's still submissive. She's not saying, that's it, dad, you're nuts. She may voice stuff, but she's voicing it to talk rather than voicing it to say, I'm done here. I'm not hearing you. I would say that child is still basically submissive. My verdict on that child would be pray like crazy and work like crazy to see them understand the gospel. If necessary, listen, if necessary, step aside from being an elder to focus on it. If you think that's the problem, do you think you just got to... You haven't got the time right now to devote to caring for your 18-year-old daughter's needs and to be a shepherd of the church. First sphere of ministry right there. Don't let your daughter's faith die on the hill of your service for God. No. Focus on your daughter. Focus on your son. Focus on your children. That's the point, isn't it? You don't just say, never mind, I'm too busy. Too busy to deal with your... You work out your faith. You'll be all right. You know. No, this is primary. But as you said, your focus on your children, not saying the work is done once I've saved them. I'm being faithful to proclaim the gospel to them and trust the Lord to save them. That's the element where we're trusting in God's sovereignty. Yeah. I think those are just painting different scenarios and realizing that it's not easy. But I think the description of faithful, qualified by, not accused of debauchery or insubordination or rebellion, that's really helpful because it says that's what we're talking about. We're talking about not wild and rebellious. We're talking about faithful, talking about trustworthy, obedient. So if they fit that description, broadly speaking, I'd say, okay. Any questions in the room? Daniel. Go for it. Give that man a mic. Saint Daniel. Sorry. It will be very brief, but because I'm the one that asked that question, but the specific point, I guess for me was more about, because I know you kind of gave a scenario of they're kind of down, but like, no, they've just come to a settled, I don't really believe this at all, but they're still like, they're not out there trying to go on TikTok and say, but they're just like, I don't really believe this, but I might be what's 17, I'm still at home. I just don't believe it. In that kind of, I know it's a bit hypothetical, but I think that's kind of what I had in my head. Like just sort of...I can't see that hypothetical situation quite so clearly because I think that would bring some pretty difficult conversations in the home. And I don't see how as someone who loved their soul, you can just be okay with, I don't believe that. Oh, okay. It just troubled me when Christian parents, you want to...now, don't get me wrong. You want to absolutely show your children that you love them no matter what, right? So you're not saying, my love for you depends upon your acceptance of the gospel because...but am I okay as your dad with you saying, I don't believe this? No, come on, let's talk about it. What do you mean you don't want to talk about it? Come on, let's talk about it. I'm not going to be able to live with that kind of just, oh, okay, you don't believe. Oh, little Johnny doesn't believe. Don't worry about him. So I can't see that kind of comfortable position as a realistic proposition. So I just...where the hypothetical...I could see it coming to a head. I could see those conversations leading to some very awkward confrontations and I could see that coming to something of a crisis point. I think during the buildup to that, I would be wanting to focus on...if that was me, I'd be wanting to say to my fellow elders, guys, I've got a looming crisis here. I need to focus on my family for a bit. Can you carry me? That's what I'd be wanting to say. And I'd be sad, I don't know what's going to happen here. This is scary because I've got to confront this situation at home and we can't live with this. So I...but I wouldn't be okay about just letting that continue. So effectively, it wouldn't necessarily disqualify them, but it's kind of like at that point, you probably should... I don't know whether...I just don't know whether I would say, right, that's it, I resign as an elder or whether I would just say at that point, guys, carry me for a while. I need to focus on...we have to do that for each other for health reasons. We have to do that for each other for family health reasons. Look, I'm sorry, I just can't preach for the next few weeks. I'm not saying this, but I can't preach for the next few weeks because I've got to look after my parents. It's just too much for me. I can't cope with it. Guys, can you carry me? Well, what would you do at that point with that, something like that going on in your home? Boy, this is Christ's moment. I can't allow that to continue. I've got to focus on it because if it carries on and it is where it seems to be going, it could disqualify me. That's where I would be...how can I be okay with that? Because it's not going to be secret, is it? An elder's child just rejects the gospel and if they try to say, you know, I just don't believe it. Hold on a minute, that's going to get known. Isn't that pretty quick? It's not going to be...so why is Johnny not coming to church? It just gets really awkward real quick, doesn't it? You can't...I don't think you can have that situation in the home and not do something about it. But feel free to chime in if you would disagree, brothers. I have not really thought that through. I think you would more have that case where a child would just be sort of silently assenting without voicing their fear, doubt, concern, confusion because they don't want to make things awkward or they don't want to upset the balance in the home. And that would go back to as a father, do you know your children? Are you creating an environment where they are opening up to you and you are chasing after them? I think that's a scary possibility. Another possibility, they're telling the other children in the church they don't believe, but they're telling you at home everything's fine. That's scarier still, isn't it? What would you do with that? So I think that's a very powerful reflection. As a parent, you'd be thinking, oh boy, Houston, we have a problem here. You'd not be thinking, oh well, they're not wild and disobedient. Never mind. I get to keep my job. Hopefully you'd have higher things in mind like their salvation. So just if you've submitted a question, I'm looking through them. I think we've handled a majority of them in one way or another, so I'm being cautious not to just sort of state the same hypothetical seven or eight different ways. There's one question that came in that is interesting, I think even more generally for the church, but the question is, should we teach our children to pray for God's grace to help them obey their parents? We can obviously pray for them, but until they're saved, and the writer says, correct me if I'm wrong, they only receive common grace and their prayers might be regarded as different to those of a believer. That is a great question. I do believe God hears the prayers of unbelievers. I know it's common for people to say that he doesn't, but if you go to Mark 6, you see Jesus hearing the prayers of demons and answering them. Let us go into the pigs. Okay. Don't send us to the abyss. Okay, you can go into the pigs. It's Jesus answering their prayer. You're like, whoa, how did that just happen? But seriously, should we teach our children to pray for God's grace to help them obey? Oh, yes. I think you want to take every opportunity you can to evangelize your children. So when they ask a question like that, when they say... I remember my friend, Powell, the Romanian pastor, his son, Emil, once said, daddy, I'm sorry. From now on, I will be good. And it's just one of those just like teachable moments. Okay, son, you have not understood your own heart. You don't realize you've got a wicked heart. It's going to lead you astray. You're going to sin again. You need the new birth. This is the point, isn't it? If you believe your children are born in sin, if you believe they have a rebellious, wicked nature, I do, you believe that they need nothing less than the new birth. It's not like a stepping stone system where they start off here and then they climb up a little bit and then they believe a little bit more and they believe a little bit more. And then finally, they're kind of good enough. They've achieved enough in the way of their understanding and belief to be saved. Okay, that may be the reality that you're filling in pieces of the puzzle and finally the last piece of the puzzle goes in. But you know what? The last piece of the puzzle makes them realize, I am lost and I'm going to hell because I'm a sinner unless God rescues me from me. So all the time little children are in their home and they're being obedient and then they hit that moment where they're like, I can't, this is hard, I can't do it. Okay, that's a moment to teach the gospel to your children. That's when you say, listen son, you cannot obey God without God giving you a new heart. So you don't just need to go to God for grace to obey me, you need to go to God for a new heart and then you're going to want to obey me because God says obey your mom and dad. And you're going to want to obey God because you love God and because you fear God, not because you fear getting into trouble again and getting caught again. So all the time you're kind of catching your children and they're like, I got caught, they're not getting it. When they come to you and they confess, I sinned because I sinned against God and I can't live with it. I've got to confess my sin to you dad because I know you didn't know about it but I just can't bear it because I've offended God, oh boy, that's what you'd be looking for as a parent because you want to see them fearing God. And so those moments are teachable moments. I would not say so much ask them to pray for grace to be able to obey, ask them to pray for a new heart to be able to obey. If you think they're saved then, absolutely, you've got... And this is the mystery of parenting is you are trying to parent them towards conversion but when they profess faith, you don't want to just disbelieve it. You don't just say, oh, I don't believe you believe in God until I've seen a dramatic conversion and not every conversion is like that. So you want to say, okay, well, if you believe, then this is what the Bible says you must do. And then you parent them in sanctification. But all the time you're thinking, so if you're going to be sanctified, yes, you're going to need to rely upon the grace of God. You're going to have to go back for daily cleansing. You have to go back. You mustn't grieve the spirit. I would say something like if you're truly saved, the spirit of God lives in you but you can grieve the spirit. If you've offended the spirit, you're not going to have the power to obey. So okay, go back to God for forgiveness and cleansing and that's the path. But I'm always thinking, well, if my child is not yet saved, then all of this means nothing. I'm just going to keep holding out for the real thing. I hope that answers that question. Anyone in the room? This is quite a crazy one, but... Quite a what? Crazy. So... We can do crazy at 10 o'clock. Good. So as Christians, we want to have kids. We want to be fruitful and multiply, have lots of kids. But to my understanding, every kid you have, you make that kid because you're the one that has to... that makes them and that every kid you have is a potential soul that could go to hell. So my question is, how do you reconcile that problem? Because seriously, you're probably going to blame yourself for making that kid in the first place, bringing that kid into existence. So that's what I want to know. Yeah, you would absolutely blame yourself if you put yourself in God's place, but that's not what you can do. So you just can't go there. You just have to say, look, God has given us marriage. Marriage is for the procreation of children. Children are a blessing from the Lord. Children are a blessing from the Lord, whether He saves them or not. That whole area of God's sovereign choice over their salvation has to be God's sovereign area. I can't go there. Otherwise I'm saying, well, if only I was God, it would be different. What I have to say is, you know what? I'm not God. It is as it is. God has His reasons and God knows best. And so then I'm submitting myself to God's greater mind, which is not that difficult if you just go and look at a blade of grass or a flower or something. And then you can say, okay, you know what you're doing, God. What am I even thinking? You know what you're doing. So I just come back to creation, to the creator, and say, God knows what He's doing. Now I mean that when I say go and look at a blade of grass because when you see design and you know the magnificence of the designer, you can extrapolate from that to a wonderful purpose for it all. Paul does that in Romans 1. So you can say, God knows exactly what He's doing. God is good because God designed that. I mean that mind knows what He's doing. Although I see mess like a painter painting on a canvas, I see mess, but the painter's bringing it to a beautiful conclusion. When I see it come together, I'm going to go, wow. And that's what I'm looking for at the end of time, at the end of my time is to see it from God's perspective. And I know I'm not going to be disappointed. I know I'm going to be in awe because I know enough of God to believe that about Him. So be fruitful. Go forth and multiply. That's what God says. That doesn't mean you have to have as many children as you possibly can. Please pity your future wife and revise that childish view of human responsibility. But in all seriousness, it does mean that the creation command to be fruitful and multiply exists for a reason. And God knows what He's doing. Should we have another crazy one? Another crazy one? I think Sharon put her hand up. Are you saying her question's going to be crazy? No, I have one here. I'm not saying anything. No, no, no. Don't pin that on me. We'll do this one and then we'll come back to you. Okay. Would an elder's wife need to be a believer? If he married her in a way that wasn't sinful, but she turns out to be an unbeliever, can he continue on as an elder? Thinking of this, 1 Corinthians 9.5, do we not have the right to take on along a believing wife as do the other apostles and the brothers of the Lord in Cephas? Yeah, it's a super clever question. I agree with MacArthur that it's not mentioned in the text. MacArthur just says nothing said about the wife here and it's not mentioned. Now, he says it's assumed in the text. I think it's a pretty big assumption that you could pretty much agree with that if your wife turns out not to be a believer, that's a crisis moment in your ministry, isn't it? You would say, all right, I would say, okay guys, stop the world. I need to attend to this. I wouldn't say you can make it an absolute disqualification because it's not there in the text. If someone has... I think a good example of that might be William Carey was his wife a believer. She seemed to be a believer. She went completely mad and spent the rest of her days in a lunatic asylum in India. Another example would be, and people would be less charitable about this example, but John Wesley, whose wife just seemed to be really horrible and they didn't get on, they had a terrible marriage and as she stayed behind, he left her and went off on his travels. What do you say about that? One interesting thing about this actually, by the way, if you take an idealistic view of what is required and you say, well, we understand this, this and this, and then you take that and you try to apply it to church history, you get the distinct impression that God is willing to work with people that we would not be willing to work with. I'm not saying it's wrong that we wouldn't be willing to work with them because we have to follow the scripture as we understand it. In church history, God has used people quite clearly, remarkably used people who don't fit all the neat categories that we would want to put them into. What do you do with that? I don't think you have to do anything with it. You just say, we need to be obedient. We have a responsibility to follow the scriptures as we understand them. They were trying to do the same and God held them to the standards that they understood and God was willing to work within their standards. God was willing to work with some of those people whilst they were still in the Roman Catholic Church. There ain't no way they'd be older than this church. He worked with them from where they were and brought them to where they needed to be. Sometimes they didn't go as far in their Reformation as we would want them to go, but God still used them. Whatever we do, don't let's become idealistic and nitpicky and apply this to everyone else and everything else in church history. Let's apply it to ourselves and use it as a tool to enable us to be as faithful to God as we can be. Well, and I would add to that, if a man aspired to eldership but his wife wasn't a believer, I would ask him, why do you want to lead the church? Why don't you want to spend all of your time at home? The idea of your better half not believing. I think for a man who would aspire to eldership and could aspire to eldership, that would be his greatest burden of his heart. That would end up taking enough time and thought that I would think it would be difficult to actually take on the role of elder. Not as much a qualification, just a reality of how would you do it? That directly leads into the question about what is ministry. It is all-consuming. One of the questions you ask of any candidate for ministry is, what does your wife think about this? This is the first question we got asked when I went to meet Ray Merringer for the interview to get into the seminary. It was like, okay, Tom, thanks for coming. Now, Donna, what do you think about Tom's desires to study for ministry? He's told me that many a time when he's asked the woman that, it's the first time she's ever really been asked and she's not really on board with the whole thing. At his point, that's like a red card. I'm sorry, we're not going to start you into this all-consuming pathway unless you two who are one, one flesh, unless you two are 100% in it together because you are going to need her full support and she's going to need to sacrifice for the same end that you're on. This is an all-consuming pathway. I just don't see how practically you could operate in the ministry unless your wife was 100% with you. That's different from being a single man because, again, his whole unity is just himself, but to have half of yourself be against what you're doing just seems to be... Let's play out the Paul Washer scenario, which is that describes, isn't it? Isn't that right? His wife was then suddenly realized she wasn't a believer and was converted. Did that disqualify him and requalify him again? I think you just carry on at that point. It's just suddenly, so now she's converted. Praise the Lord. If she realized, I'm not converted and I don't want to be, that would be a showstopper for what he was doing, wouldn't it? That would really put a fly in the ointment. I realize I'm not converted, but you know what? I don't want to be. Wow. How can two walk together unless they agree? That's what the proverb says. It's just really tough at that point. Sharon. My question relates to point 12. The believing position puts an inappropriate pressure on prospective elders and existing elders to believe their child's professions of faith. Parents need to be able to wait for a credible profession without any pressure on them and without putting pressure on their children. Just to maybe set aside the pressure on the children and to focus on the parents, since it's impossible to know if someone is truly believing and you mentioned that, I think it was point eight, Tom, or point nine, something like that. Point something. Yeah. Since with the flock, this is what we would say of people in the church, just as we would with our children. And since with anyone in the church, we would accept their profession until or unless we saw no evidence of fruit or there was an evidence of unbelief. If we were to apply that same criteria to our children, other than the obvious that it would perhaps the prospect of the child later on turning out to not be saved. This is as regards if you were to take the believing position, then would it not be the same for the child in the house as it would be for the flock? And therefore, where would you then, would you still see that as being an unacceptable pressure or what kind of pressure? Yes. Less pressure? So, I think the difference between, and I'm not sure if I was able to follow your question, but let me try and summarize it. So maybe if you guys were able to follow it, correct me, correct me, Sharon. But the question of the difference between a profession of faith from a child in the home and the difference between that and a profession of faith of an adult who comes into the church and who just says, I repent, I believe, I'm following the Lord, will you baptize me? In the latter situation, so the adult believer walks into the church, we still present to them the whole question of, has your faith been tested? So I will, if I'm talking about to someone about membership and baptism, for instance, I'm going to say to them, look, do you realize that this could cost you your life? You realize that if you profess faith, you've got to be willing to gather with Christ. Are you gathering with Christ? There's a cost to that. It's going to cost you friends, family. I'm going to put in front of them Jesus' statements like the one we read, come to set a man against his father, mother-in-law, and it's always better to say mother-in-law, that's easier somehow. But daughter, wife, this is painful stuff, isn't it? This is the sword that divides. I'm going to put those kind of things in front of people. You realize, are you willing to take up your cross? And have you met that barrier? That's a legitimate question, isn't it, with an adult. If someone says, you know what, yes, I am evangelizing, it is costing me. I realize I'm counting the cost, but I want to follow Christ. Good. I'm not going to say, I don't believe you until I've seen the fruit visibly with my eyes. I'm going to follow you around for the next six weeks. I believe what they say. If they say that, until I've got evidence to... If someone comes forward and says, you know what, that person's just making it all up. They're actually living in sin still. What? Okay, I need to talk to them about that. But that's one scenario. Child in the home, very difficult to see whether that faith has genuinely been tested and proven. So you can talk about it. But there's... A Christian home ought to be a very protected environment. You're not exposing your children to a ton of awful stuff, hopefully. And maybe if your children are in a secular school, or Christian school is probably worse, maybe if your children are in school with lots of other kids, there's going to be real opportunity for them to be sure, yeah, I'm following Christ because I'm willing to take up my cross and take persecution. So it happened to me. When I was 15, when I was 14 going on 15, I was in boarding school. I was the only Christian that I knew of in the school. It was instant persecution. I instantly lost a load of my friends. There's no question about whether I was willing to take up my cross and follow Christ or not. I didn't even have to ask that question. I was like, I believe I've got to go and tell my friends, my friends now hate me, but I'm sticking with Jesus. And Jesus actually stuck with me. But when there's not that clarity in a child's life, you don't want to be jumping on a profession of faith and then saying, I believe you and you are born again and never let anyone tell you that you're not born again, which is what some people say to their children. Do you say, because they go to Romans 10 and they say verse nine, if you confess with your mouth Jesus is Lord and you believe in your heart, God raised him from the dead, you shall be saved. All right. Do you confess with your mouth? Yes. Do you believe in your heart? Yes. You're saved. Don't ever let anyone tell you otherwise. Well, that's just foolish because confessing with your mouth Jesus as Lord is taking him as Lord when Caesar's Lord. That's a big statement. That's like saying I'm ready to die for this. And believing in your heart, God raised him from the dead is no small things, believing in the whole gospel. So there's a lot backed into that. That's someone under those circumstances who was ready to suffer and die for God. They've counted the cost. There's not a small, just say the words confession. This is salvation with a lot of meaning to it. It's just hard to tell whether that's really the case with a child because they're so desperate to please you. And as a parent, you're like, I know that you love me and I know you know what I want you to say. And so how do I know if you're saying it to please me because you know that that's what I want to hear or how do I know whether you're really believing it or not? And I don't want to put all those doubts in your mind, so I'm just going to wait and see. I think that's what I'm saying. And then the pressure that comes in from the outside, I think it is real. I have read a very, very helpful article by Josiah Grauman, who's the leader of the Spanish Institute at the Master Seminary. A good friend from when I did the Doctor of Ministry class. And he wrote an article about Titus 1.6, warning, trying to persuade pastors not to say your children have disqualified you, but to take the ownership. If they're behaving badly and you're not qualified, it's you that have disqualified you, not them. So very helpful argument. But the reason for his article and the reason for the whole argument that's out there is just because this pressure is real. And parents will say to their children, if you behave like that, daddy will lose his job. And children will get that picture and then they know that they've got to be hypocrites. Rather than what you want as a parent is you want your parent children able to talk to you. Okay, if you've got doubts, tell me about them. Let's talk about it. They're not off the table, they're on the table. They're on the table in church, aren't they? Why can't they be on the table at home? So you've got to have that openness somehow. And the pressure puts a fear in children to conform and to say the right thing, which I think is really unhelpful. That's the limit of that point. And I really would stress that point on its own does not mean the argument is one. I almost wish I hadn't brought it up because it really is such a pragmatic point. But I think it's part of a logical case. Why would God engineer it that way, I suppose you could say is the... Go ahead, you look like you're about to say something. I had my own testimony, was raised in an elder's home, got saved, well made a profession of faith when I was seven years old. But then for the years after that, it was hard for even me to know if I understood as a seven year old what I was committing myself to living in a safe, well shepherded Christian home. I didn't feel like I had counted the cost. I didn't feel like I had had the moments to really test my faith. And it wasn't until I went to uni and had the ability to see myself say, no, I do believe this, I will die for this. Not obviously actually die, but in the context of my life, actually see it tested that I said, no, this is what I'm about. I do believe this and I'm gonna stand for it. So through that whole time, my parents weren't going, okay, so are you saved yet? Is it real? Because we gotta know, because dad's an elder and we can't. Because the idea was we're figuring it out. It's a season of learning. And throughout that, I wasn't being rebellious and it wasn't partying and those kinds of things. So I think I was faithful and in so much as I knew how. And so was I saved that whole time? I don't know, I'm saved now. So seeing that kind of testimony in my own life makes me really hesitant to try to say now for other people's children, pin it down to a moment, to a point, and then that's the deciding factor in that young state. You had different experiences with your siblings, didn't you? They both had different, very different experiences. Yeah, we all are saved, but we all, I mean, my parents parented very consistently and each of our process of salvation looked different and had different, I'm not gonna go into the details because they're not here, but it looked different for each of us. And the point of that is that, you know, my parents, I believe, were faithful to shepherd us, but you wouldn't have been able to necessarily point it out until God, in His timing in each of our lives, allowed us to take up our cross. I think Jack Hughes, who was one of our previous offsite elders, such a beloved brother to our church, still a great friend. He had very different experiences parenting his children, all saved, praise God. The one who they had the biggest difficulty with, absolute nightmare, rebellious child, just stubborn, strong-willed, said that they had to apply the board of learning to the seat of knowledge more with that child than with any of the others, you know, little girl who would just cry if you looked at her. Another boy, the eldest, who was just compliant, obedient, and then the youngest child, you know, nightmare from hell, born into the home, the same genes, the same parenting, exactly the same parenting, compliant, submissive, first child, daughter that would just cry if you looked at her and, you know, believed everything that they were taught, and then a really, really stubborn third child son. That son was the first, I think the first one saved. I may get this wrong. Wonderfully saved, just absolutely transformed, went from being really difficult to suddenly saved. Then years later, the eldest, Nate, who had been all along submissive, said he believed, everyone thought he believed, suddenly realised he wasn't a believer and was saved, came home and said, I've been saved. I just didn't know. You know, that's my point. You can't tell whether it's true or not. And so you would have said, oh, believer, believer, not a half-shareable, not a believer, but they were parenting consistently, faithfully. They kept him in submission with great effort and many a spanking. You want to listen to Jack Hughes' parenting seminars, which are available on our app. It's just brilliant. And you'll hear about some of those tears and just trials, parenting such a rebellious, difficult child, but they succeeded. They kept him under control, preached the gospel to him and he was saved. A dramatic conversion, but the other one, you thought he was saved and he wasn't. So if you had taken a snapshot at adulthood of all three children, all three adult children living in the home, you'd have said all three are saved. That really difficult child, now he's been saved, wonderful, the lovely submissive daughter, she's been saved for ages, wonderful. And that wonderfully compliant and well-behaved son, oh, he's been saved for years. How wonderful. Actually, the oldest would have been unsaved and you'd have just been totally wrong. It's just an interesting insight into snapshot in the home. Wasn't then saved until he was older. Any more questions out here? We've gone silent on the app. So either everyone's asleep or... I think we are thinning out. 20 to 11. We need to wrap it up. That's a good innings, isn't it? That's not a duck, is it? In cricket terms. Did we score a duck? I still don't know anything about cricket, so... Duck is zero. Well, look, let me just bring it right back round to where I started and where I finished on Sunday and just say, look, whatever position you take, we would say we could even live with differences in our elder board on this issue. At Grace Community Church, they live with differences within their elder board. Out of a desire for unity, they submit to MacArthur's position, but you would say people within the same elder board don't agree with that. People within the same seminary don't agree with that. This is not an issue to fall out over. This is an issue to say, okay, we seek unity. Obviously, it's an issue if you believe an elder is unqualified and who is one of your elders and the other elders don't believe that that elder is unqualified because they take a different view on this to you. That's a significant issue. You would be a very foolish, very dangerous mouthed individual if you went round trying to say that I don't believe that elder is qualified and started some kind of a campaign to say over an issue like this, that elder is not qualified. I can't submit to him. That would identify you as the fool with the mouth that can't be controlled and you should keep that mouth shut and learn to submit to your elders or you seek a church where you can submit to the elders. This is not the issue to fall out over. This is the issue to, okay, recognise that this is MacArthur we're talking about. It takes a different view. You've got to take that seriously. I've tried to set out to you why I believe otherwise. I think on our current elder board, everyone that we have as an elder would agree fundamentally with the position that I've outlined, not maybe with every detail, but in the basic position we take as a collective elder board, we would take the position of faithful rather than believing as the correct translation here and all that goes with that. As to all the details of every last potential situation, we may disagree. We would have to work that out as we went. If we came across a situation like that, certainly you can see that we haven't come together for a united decision on every potential situation. Here are the basics. That's who we are as an eldership. Going forwards from here, I think it's really just important that we take away from this the essentials. One, we don't appoint a person to eldership in this church who's unqualified. That's easy, right? Number two, you pray for your elders with respect to their parenting, right? You pray for us. If you believe that all our children need to be saved, you better be praying even more. Please pray for us. Please, please beg God for the salvation of our children. We are. Number three, pray for every parent in this church and every child in this church. If we don't come away from it wanting to do that, we've totally missed the point, right? This is just about saying, what does God want? God wants us to have faithful children. God doesn't only want faithful children. He wants converted children, right? We better be working and praying for that. So guys, that's it. We're done for tonight. Let me pray and let's say good night. Father in heaven, we praise you and thank you for this time to be just digging deep into your word when your word is so much deeper than our capabilities. We trust you, Lord. We don't trust ourselves. We pray that where there is error, you would expose it, where truth has been told, Lord, you would give us hearts to see it and understand it and submit to it. Oh God, please give us unity as well. Don't let the devil have an opportunity to stir up division. We pray that you would give us all submissive, united, loving, humble hearts. Thank you for that, Lord. We praise you for your kindness, giving us the unity and the blessing that we have experienced. We pray that it would continue and that it would grow to the glory and honor of your name. Amen.