# ＂The Faithful Servant’s Self-Control＂ - Titus 1_7-9
 We're going to be in Titus chapter 1 this morning, this afternoon. Please turn there with me. Titus chapter 1. I'm going to read verses 5 through 9 and then we'll pray. This is why I left you in Crete, so that you might put what remained into order and appoint elders in every town as I directed you. If anyone is above reproach, the husband of one wife and his children are believers and not open to the charge of debauchery or insubordination. For an overseer, as God's steward, must be above reproach. He must not be arrogant or quick-tempered or a drunkard or violent or greedy for gain, but hospitable, a lover of good, self-controlled, upright, holy, and disciplined. He must hold firm to the trustworthy word as taught so that he may be able to give instruction in sound doctrine and also to rebuke those who contradict it. Would you pray with me? Lord God, it is a joy to dive into your word after seeing its power in the lives of those whom you have saved. We thank you for each of the six testimonies we just heard and for the many other testimonies that are a part of the story and the fabric of this church. We thank you for rescuing us. I pray as we study your word now that we would see and understand and take up the call that you have made for your servants, your people, to imitate your holiness, to practice discipline so that we may be self-controlled so that we can bring glory to you. Help me as I preach. Help everyone in this room to be able to spend the next hour faithfully listening and studying with a heart to apply your word so that it can transform our lives and bring you glory. We pray this in your name's sake. Amen. Okay. So, cast your mind back about 500 years. It's about 19 years after Martin Luther kicked off the Reformation in Germany. But our story doesn't take place in Germany. It takes place north of here in Scotland. The year is 1546. And we're in the city of St. Andrews. Now in the city of St. Andrews, there was a group of men who had become Protestants. They had heard the teaching of the Reformation and become convinced that the Protestant view of scripture was the truth. And they began to teach. They began to preach. And they began to become unpopular with the Catholic Church. And through a series of events that I won't get into, there was a group of these men, these reformers who ended up trapped inside a castle in St. Andrews, besieged by Roman Catholic soldiers who wanted to punish them. Now within this group of Protestants, there was a man called John Knox. If you know your church history, you've probably heard the name John Knox. He was a former Catholic. He had actually been ordained in the Catholic Church. And he had become convinced of Protestant teaching. Now in the castle, these men were besieged for many months. And they tried to practice Christian life with each other while under siege. So each week they'd have a sermon from their pastor. And they tried to go on living as best they could faithfully. And over the months, John Knox's companions began to see testimony in his life that he may be called to ministry. They saw his faithfulness. They saw his character. They saw the way he served and loved others and his commitment to the word. And they began to start to tell him, you might need to be a minister. Now he refused. He wasn't interested. So finally, his pastor used his pastoral rights to take some liberties and call John Knox to the ministry. He did so during a sermon. In the middle of the sermon, he paused, looked at John in the eyes, and said this. So just imagine this happening right now. Maybe it is. Just kidding. In the name of God and of his Son Jesus Christ, in the name of these that presently call you by mouth, I charge you that you refuse not this holy vocation. But as ye tender the glory of God, the increase of Christ's kingdom, the edification of your brethren, and the comfort of me, oppressed by the multitude of labors, that ye take upon you the public office of preaching, even as ye look to avoid God's heavy displeasure and desire that he shall multiply his graces upon you. That is one way to call a man to ministry. You better be a pastor or God's gonna smite you. In front of everyone in the church, right? So I was proposing in first service to Tom that this is how we should call the future elders of Grace Life London. So we'll see what happens. So how does Knox respond? Well in his own autobiography, he writes that these words were spoken to him. He proceeded to burst into tears and run from the room. Hide in his own room and not come out. This man who was obviously gifted, who other Christians could see his gifting, his love for the church, his love for God's word, this is a qualified man. When he's asked to join the pastorate, he flees. Now if you know anything about John Knox, you know that he was a strong, faithful warrior for God. He was not a coward. This man would go on to do some things that many of us would be afraid to do. But when he's asked to be a pastor, he panics. Now why? Why this? I think it's because he understood what the Bible expects of the leaders of the church. Knox was intimately familiar with God's word and he knew what God expected of his shepherds and he knew his own weakness. The calling to minister to God's people is a high calling. Paul tells us that those who aspire to be elders desire a noble task, but it is a dangerous task. James 3.1 says, not many of you should become teachers, brothers, because you know that we who teach will be judged with greater strictness. Now Knox understood this. He understood what was expected of a steward of God's household and he was terrified of falling short. Now we need to understand what he understood, don't we? Some of us in this church in the coming years, if God wills, will be called to be elders of this church. Those men better know what God expects of them. For the rest of us, we need to be able to submit to those men. We need to know what God's called them to do and we need to understand to respect their authority. So that's why we're studying Titus. We've been in Titus for, this is our seventh sermon, so we've been in it for six weeks now and Tom has been setting the framework for us. You know that the Cretans like us were living in a world, in a culture that rejected truth outright, that it was chaos. And so Paul said in that chaos you need to prioritize having men who can lead the church because that's the way God designed it. Men who are qualified, who are faithful. And Paul told us that the way to think of a man who would be qualified is that he would be what? Above reproach, right? And Tom said this is someone who's non-stick, someone who an accusation comes, it gains no traction because anyone can look at their life, can look at their priorities and can see there's no way that that's true about him. And then Paul starts to tell us how we can know someone's above reproach. And for the last few weeks you know we've been studying how the man's home life will demonstrate, will prove his consistency in faith. But this week we're going to move out of the elders home. We're going to be in Titus 1, 7, and 8 and we're going to see some more qualifications. So let's read Titus 1, 7, the first sentence there gives us kind of the framework for our approach. It says, for an overseer as God's steward must be above reproach. Now Paul's essentially repeating the beginning of verse 6, but he uses a different term. He uses the term overseer. Now overseer was similar to the term elder and they refer to the same thing, but they refer to the same thing in different ways. See the elder, the term elder refers to the dignity of the role of the leader of the church. Someone who is mature. Someone who has earned their place of authority. But overseer is about the function of the leader. It literally means to see over, to look over, to administrate the work of the church. And that's important because Paul also says that the overseer is the steward of God's household. Paul, Tom set that up for us a couple weeks ago talking about the steward. The steward was one of the servants, one of the slaves of the master who would be deemed faithful, responsible, and trustworthy enough to lead the home. To stand in the place of the master, to represent his authority, his decision making, his priorities. So Paul's context has shifted from the elder's household to the household of the master. And that's where we're going to be for the next few weeks. We are all slaves of God. We are all equally his servants, but some men, God has in his providence chosen to act as the stewards of the household. So as Paul continues in verses seven through nine, he's going to answer the question, what marks a faithful man, a faithful servant who could be a steward? Now we want our church to begin to raise up elders from within. And this passage is helping us find those elders, but please remember as I just said, we are all servants. We are all slaves of God. These qualifications should be something that we hold ourselves to, not just the leaders of the church. There are many things about an elder that need to be trained. He needs to understand the word of God. He needs to be able to handle it well. He needs to be a leader. These kinds of things can be trained, but the character should be evident. It should be obvious. And for each of us, our character should reflect the character of our master. We all must be faithful servants. So in the next few weeks, we're going to look at these verses and we're going to try to highlight the character traits of faithful servants. Now there's a lot of attributes, so I'm not just going to go one by one in order. I'm going to try to group them up over the next few weeks so we can see generally the picture that Paul is painting of a faithful steward. Now arguably the largest category of characteristics that we just read from Titus 1, 7, and 8 could be self-control. So I want to start our study of these verses with this big idea. If you're a note taker, pens at the ready. Faithful servants of Christ are marked by their lives of self-control. Faithful servants of Christ are marked by their lives of self-control. If you want to get really simple, you can just say, faithful servants are self-controlled. Now there's three points we're going to look at today. First we're going to look at the fact that faithful servants display self-control. Self-control is not a secret attribute. It affects everything you do. You can tell when someone is self-controlled. But we don't just display self-control. Faithful servants, second, we will see we receive self-control. Faithful servants receive self-control. And finally, we'll see that faithful servants practice self-control. So let's start with our first point. Faithful servants display self-control. Now we've got a lot of positive attributes and a lot of negative attributes. So let's break them up. We're going to start with things that a disciplined, self-controlled faithful servant is not. And we're looking at Titus 1 and 1 Timothy 3. I'm going to put both of them together so we can make sure we get every term that Paul uses here. First we see from Titus 1, 7, faithful servants are not arrogant. Arrogant. Now the term that Paul uses for arrogant is the idea of a person who is just caught up in themselves. Someone who is caught up in their own will. Think of the person who is self-satisfied, so confident in their own opinion, their own way of thinking or doing things that they can't be bothered to hear another viewpoint. Now what's an example of this? If you want to exemplify this kind of character, think of the Pharisees. Think of these men who were leaders of the Jewish people during God's time. These men had a conviction about the Word of God, but Jesus points out that their conviction was laced with their own opinion of themselves. So that when Jesus came and said, what if your interpretation is wrong? What if it actually means this? What if it means that I'm the Messiah and I'm here? They rejected it. They turned it away. These men when confronted with another point of view doubled down. They weren't interested in hearing another way of thinking. They weren't interested in the possibility that they got it wrong. Rather than listen to reason or try to understand, they determined to have Jesus killed. It's not even that they say, I disagree and you can continue, you know, go on and Jesus and do your thing and we'll do our thing over here. No, it was, that's against my view and I'll kill you for it. The arrogant man believes the hype about himself. This usually ends in tragedy. Many of us have been under the ministry of arrogant men and women. You know what it means to have someone in charge who's not interested in being wrong, in being confronted, in being shown that they're in error. Now how does this tie into the overarching characteristic of self-control? If you're like me, you probably wouldn't think of arrogant and self-controlled as the same thing. But the arrogant person is self-absorbed. He believes in himself. He believes in the way that he thinks about things. He's overconfident. So when the word is brought to bear on his heart, he has no interest in it. Wisdom is ignored. He is his only master. And the funny thing about the arrogant man or woman is that they are very self-controlled. They are literally self-controlled. They are controlled not by truth, not by the word of God, but by themselves. They are their own God. They are their own highest authority. The self-control that Scripture teaches speaks of putting yourself under the authority of God and taking your body and your flesh and your sin and submitting it to the will of God. Well, the arrogant person submits themselves to their own will. Can an arrogant person make a good steward? Absolutely not, because who's the master? Not the steward, right? The arrogant man cannot be trusted to have the best interests of the master or of his fellow servants in mind, because he's only out for his own glory. Faithful stewards cannot be arrogant. But second, look back at Titus 1-7, faithful servants are not quick-tempered. They cannot be quick-tempered. Now this describes the person who is just immediate reaction to any sort of conflict, any sort of disagreement, any sort of weakness, any sort of problem is anger. We use the term having a short fuse, right? It doesn't take much to set this person off. Now there's an interesting depiction, there's an interesting contrast between a man who's quick-tempered and a man who controls himself in 1 Samuel 20. In this passage, King Saul has determined to kill David, but David's best friend, Jonathan, who you remember is Saul's son, sides with David. Jonathan's on David's team. And when Saul finds out that Jonathan is defending David, he responds this way. Listen to 1 Samuel 20, starting in verse 30. Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said to him, you son of a perverse, rebellious woman, do I not know that you have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame and to the shame of your mother's nakedness? For as long as the son of Jesse lives on the earth, neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Therefore, send and bring him to me, for he shall surely die. Then Jonathan answered Saul, his father, why should he be put to death? What has he done? But Saul hurled his spirit at him to strike him. So Jonathan knew his father was determined to put David to death. Now notice there, this is the key. In that conflict, Saul is angry, right? His anger is kindled against Jonathan. Jonathan is still submitting to his father. Saul goes off on this tirade and Jonathan says, okay, well, dad, what did he do? Tell me what he did. Saul is still the king. Jonathan still wants to honor his father. But when he is challenged, how does Saul respond? Kill the boy, kill my son, how dare he challenge me? That's the quick tempered man. And can you see how dangerous that is in a leader? The king of Israel would kill his own son just for having a question asked. But now look at how Jonathan responds to this in the next verse. And Jonathan rose from the table in fierce anger and ate no food for the second day of the month, for he was grieved for David because his father had disgraced him. So Jonathan is angry. He's fiercely angry at his father's response. But notice that he is angry because his father has sinned and he does not lash out against his father. He does not respond. He removes himself. He fasts. He mourns. This is a man who has his anger under control. He is angry, rightfully so, but he doesn't take that into his own hands. See leaders must be able to control their anger. You cannot be quick tempered and be self-controlled. The quick tempered man is at the mercy of his emotions. He can't even stop himself. It just happens. You'll hear people like this say, I just see red and after that I don't know what happens. Do you want that kind of person in charge of the church? It's very dangerous in leadership. We need our leaders to be calm in conflict. We need them to be able to receive attack, receive debate, receive disagreement with mercy, looking for reconciliation, looking for fellowship, looking to restore people. Can the quick tempered man make a faithful steward? No. He will certainly end up violating the will of his master. He's going to take matters into his own hands. Now this should be said now and it applies to the whole sermon. Obviously as we've said before, these qualifications are not about perfection. We will all struggle with the sins of anger and the other sins that we'll talk about today. All of us grapple with our arrogance. We're not talking about someone who occasionally gives in to their frustration, occasionally lashes out. This adjective would describe you and you have a big problem and you need help. This term describes a man who's not self-controlled but a man who is controlled by anger. You see that? A faithful steward cannot be quick tempered. But next we see that faithful servants are not violent or quarrelsome. And you can see here we've got arrogance, we've got quick temper. You put those two together, what are you going to get? Arrogance and quarreling. These are two qualifications. One of them is in, well both of them are in Titus and then the quarrelsome one is in First Timothy. Now a faithful servant must not be violent. The term here is used for someone who's spoiling for a fight. Someone who's always looking to get into it. And the term literally means a puncher. You cannot be a puncher. You cannot be going around just hoping. Someone give me a reason. Right? You ever heard that? This person loves to engage with anyone who disagrees. They like to find a way that you're disagreeing with them just so that they can get into it with you. Now you can love the truth. You can cherish your Savior and still be disqualified on this point. That's a scary thing isn't it? If you want to see this just go on the internet for about eight seconds. See people who love Jesus but are violent and quarrelsome. Now think about our dear friends Peter, James, and John when Jesus was unjustly arrested in the middle of the night in the garden. What does Peter do? He just pulls out his sword and starts swinging. He wants to hurt somebody. Would he have been able to free Jesus? Absolutely not. But he's going to go down swinging right? You think of James and John when the Samaritan village rejects Jesus and they come to him and say hey Jesus just checking do you want us to call down some fire from heaven on these guys? Jesus no right? But in their mind they're thinking I'm being faithful. They've offended my God. I need to strike them. These are over reactions. These men wanted to fight. They wanted to see someone suffer for their insolence. But the elder, the faithful steward takes the measured, the reasonable approach. Now 1 Timothy 3 gives us this term quarrelsome. Now the violent man it is literally a term for violence. We're talking about someone who wants to fight. But 1 Timothy 3 tells us they must not be quarrelsome. This is the fight of words. So I imagine in our day and age most of you have not been in a fist fight this week over a theological debate. If you have been please talk to me afterwards. And I doubt any of you have ever been challenged to a duel. So we're not generally dealing with violence, especially in people we'd be thinking about leading the church. But quarrelsome, the desire to get into a fight of words. I think that pervades Christian culture today. Do you bicker? Do you debate? Do you nitpick? Do you hassle people who disagree with you? Do you have to have the last word? Paul is telling us that that fighting spirit cannot extend to your words. Now we're talking about an attitude of pugnacious fighting words. This is like the dog who's just being held back on the lead. You're holding that dog back from doing something foolish. We're not talking about Titus 1.9, which we'll get to in a few weeks. Titus 1.9 says he must hold firm to the trustworthy word as taught so that he may be able to give instruction and sound doctrine and also to rebuke those who contradict it. See that is talking about protection. Talking about direction of the flock. There are times to fight. There are times to stand up and to say hard things. We're not talking about that. We're talking about foolish, needless, prideful, nitpicking, quarreling. Now if you just think about the word quarrel, what do you think about? You think about children, right? The older brother and the younger sister just... right? It's immature. It's childish. But you need to ask yourself, do you quarrel? Do people tiptoe around you afraid to set you off on one of your favorite hobby topics? Have you decided that you are God's spokesman or spokes... spokeswoman? Have you decided that you need to make sure... you need to hold the line for this one thing no matter the cost, no matter who you hurt? Are you chasing around your brothers and sisters to try to get under their skin about silly disagreements over secondary issues? Do you even control your tongue? If you don't control your tongue, you'll be quarrelsome. If you are characterized by your attempts to battle verbally with everyone around you, then you fail this qualification. It's that simple. And Proverbs 23 says, it is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife, but a fool... every fool will be quarreling. Notice that will be quarreling, not will get into a quarrel. Just foolishness is quarreling. They're just quarrelsome people. Now lest I be understood, we have an issue in our day and age with the concept of violence and using our words. Just because we are avoiding a quarrelsome spirit does not mean that we are accepting the world's standard when it comes to words and violence. These days if you correct anything, you'll be accused of violence. And now if you don't correct certain things, you'll also be accused of violence. But that misses the point. We're talking about faithfulness to the truth. We're talking about upholding the commands of scripture, to be loving to God and to neighbor. At times we need to fight lies, we need to say hard things. But a commitment to that truth does not mean that a man or woman is pugnacious, looking to hurt others. Does that make sense? We are not to be violent or quarrelsome. Now I was talking about this qualification with a brother in our church this week, and he summarized it really well. I'm just going to shamelessly repeat what he said. Listen to this. The skillful elder wins people over the long term with peace, patience, and gentleness, not aggression, and not being intentionally provocative or argumentative. That's it. Amen to that. We've seen now, so we see this, this not being intentionally provocative or argumentative. So add that to what we've already said. We've got a faithful steward who's not controlled by his pride. He's not controlled by his anger. And he's not trying to win. He's not trying to hurt others. But finally we see a faithful steward who's not controlled by his fleshly desires. Look at Titus 1.7 again. See the faithful steward is not a drunkard, not addicted to wine. 1 Timothy 3 repeats this. Now the idea behind this term, there's nothing to exegete here. It means addicted to wine. This is someone who's mastered by, enslaved to wine, and receives all the consequences of that enslavement. Now Paul's being very specific here. He's talking about someone who is addicted to wine. Not someone who drinks wine, someone who is addicted to wine. Now in the Old Testament, some people wouldn't drink wine. The priest didn't drink wine while they were on the job, and if you took a Nazarite vow, you didn't drink wine while you were in the term of your vow. But most people did, and there wasn't this policy of never drinking for most people. We know that Jesus drank wine. So what we're not saying here is that to be an elder you can never drink. Now that doesn't mean that all of us should drink. There are many dangers about that that we're aware of. But here's my main point. You could never touch a single drop of alcohol and still be a drunkard, according to this verse, according to the spirit of what Paul is getting afterwards. After here. See, a drunkard is what? A drunkard is a glutton. A drunkard is someone who is enslaved to the fleshly desire to drink an alcoholic drink. You could argue that it's also someone who would be using drugs, right? Someone who is addicted to a substance that impairs them. But the heart behind that is gluttony. It's wanting what you want when you want it as much as you can have without any reserve or self-control. See, the root issue is the problem. It's the gluttony that's the problem. You can enjoy good things without being enslaved to them, but a drunkard can't. So you need to consider this. Everything that you consume today is being engineered to be enslaving. Everything now is, if the companies that made the products we use had their way, everything would be as enslaving as alcohol is. And that's what they're working to try to do. Your food isn't normal food anymore. It's engineered to make it so that you have to have one more bite, one more box, one more crate of that delicious snack, right? Your TV is designed to keep you watching. Your video games are designed to keep you playing. The social media that you're scrolling through is designed to keep you scrolling. Even our fitness plans and our gym memberships are designed in a way to keep us so ashamed of ourselves and discontent with the way we look that we keep signing up, we keep paying, and we keep not actually working out. Oh, sorry, that's just me. Your Amazon account is designed to keep you buying things, right? Buy with one click. That's like the most dangerous phrase anyone's ever invented. If you think you're safe from these and other temptations to be a glutton, you underestimate how committed these companies are to enslaving you. The human heart tends towards gluttony. Modern Western society has made gluttony the goal. The goal is if I can get enough that I can just be gluttonous at whatever I like, I have achieved what I'm after. How does this tie into self-control? I mean, the drunkard and the glutton, they're enslaved to their flesh, to their desires. They want what they want when they want it. They take oftentimes good things, good gifts that God has given us, and they turn them into idols. Now the self-controlled person is able to receive a gift, to appreciate it without being enslaved to it, without taking their eyes off the giver of the gift. A faithful steward cannot be addicted to wine because you can't do your job if you're drunk. Now maybe you're not addicted to wine, but the gluttonous spirit you know, it makes it really hard to be faithful spiritually, doesn't it? When you are feeding your flesh, when you're indulging the gluttony of whatever it is that you're inclined to, it's going to make it very difficult for you to be a faithful servant of God. If you're consumed with pleasure, you will not focus on the will of your master because the will of our master is for us to take pleasure in suffering for him. Do you see that? Do you see, do you know the tendencies of your flesh? Do you know what you're given to? Are you interested at all in fighting those temptations? Can you identify the gluttony in your heart, what you would go to if you had the chance? How are you fighting that? Because a faithful servant cannot be a drunkard. So what do we have so far? We've gotten through all the negative ones, sigh of relief. The faithful steward must not be arrogant, quick-tempered, drunken, violent, or quarrelsome. In other words, as a summary, the faithful steward must not be controlled by his self-importance, his anger, his fleshly desires, his need to win or to show dominance. A faithful representative of God will imitate God. If a man is obviously unable to control himself, then he shouldn't be in leadership. Does that make sense? Do you see that? So those are the negatives. But what should a faithful steward look like? Let's look at just a few qualifications. What are faithful servants? Faithful servants are self-controlled and disciplined. That's our first term of what they should be. Let's define self-control. See, both lists use the term self-controlled, and Titus includes the term disciplined. Now self-controlled comes from the concept of being reliable and steady, because you are literally safe-minded. Your mind is controlled. And a self-controlled person is trustworthy because you know that they are in control. They are not going to give in to all of the kinds of things we just looked at. Now in 1 Timothy 3, Paul used the term sober-minded, which is very similar in meaning. The idea is the mind and the affections of this person are reigned in. They have command of them. They are set on a specific purpose. You have old-fashioned terms that we don't use anymore, like temperance and prudence. That kind of thing comes to mind. There's a serenity to a self-controlled person. Not in the Buddhist monk kind of sense, but in the sense that you can trust that you have a good idea of what they are going to do next. They are steady. They are reliable. All of the do-nots we just looked at describe a person who is unable or unwilling to control their sinful behavior and desires. But the self-controlled person does the opposite. Now here's the interesting thing. Paul is writing to Titus in Crete, and we know that Crete is full of openly sinful, vile people. The general culture, Greek culture during this time at large, actually really prized self-control. The philosophies of the day put self-control as one of the chief merits, the chief virtues that a man could achieve. To be a self-controlled man was to reach the pinnacle of your humanity. You've heard of Stoicism. It's sort of making a comeback today. The Stoic is the person who is so steady as to almost be lifeless. They've set aside their emotions and their feelings and they're just steady. But that's not what Paul is getting at here. Because the self-control of the Christian does not come from a supreme effort of self-will. The Christian does not muscle their way into self-control. They love their way into self-control. See, the Christian has self-control because their heart is changed. It grows out of a love for God and a love for neighbor that makes the Christian compelled to do whatever they need to do to be obedient to God's Word. John 14, 15, Jesus says, if you love me, you will keep my commandments. The self-controlled person takes that seriously. And just like a husband who loves his wife and will set aside anything and everything that would hinder him from doing so, the Christian loves his or her Savior and sets aside and sets under control anything that would cause them to do differently. Do you see the difference? It's not just muscling your way into holiness. Now the other term that Paul uses is a synonym for self-control. It's to be disciplined. And this speaks of having your power under control. And you could say that the terms self-control and sober-minded are about having your heart and your mind in the right place. Discipline is about actually using your body to be in the right place. It's the term used for athletes who are getting their bodies into shape so they can do what they need to do. So the self-controlled person that Paul is talking about is looking at every aspect of their life. And they are putting themselves under discipline to assure that they can honor God. This is a wholehearted commitment to growing in Christlikeness. Now unlike the nots, the self-controlled person has set aside their pleasure, their gain, their self-worth, their victory, all for the pleasure, the gain, the worth, and the victory of their Master. That sounds like a good steward, doesn't it? The good steward wins the praise when he is forgotten and the Master is honored. Now in 1 Timothy, Paul mentions one other qualification that I want to make sure we bring out here. 1 Timothy 3.3, Paul says that faithful servants, that the qualified steward of God's household is gentle. Gentle. Now he says gentle in contrast with violence. And I just want to make sure that we highlight this. You should be thankful that God includes gentleness in the list of elder qualifications. Think about this, the faithful steward is not violent or quarrelsome, but gentle. We are in God's house. We are God's servants. We emulate God, right? But your God is wrathful. He is angry. He inflicts vengeance and punishes the sinner. But as his stewards, we're not called to imitate that element of his character. We aren't defined by our anger or our wrath. Instead, we're called to be gentle. Now notice that the opposite of violent or quarrelsome isn't pacifist. It's not a voider of conflict. It's gentle. Because as we've said, there's still a fight that the faithful steward will need to be engaged in. There are times where we go to war for truth, but the servant sees that the fight is won with a gentle spirit. Now let's think of two areas where this would play out practically. There are many more, but think of these two areas. If you are dealing with error or unbelief, you should be doing so with a spirit of gentleness and tenderness. It's still a fight, right? You're going against untruth. You're going against people who would be teaching lies about God. But the default, our starting point, is to be gracious and humble and tender. If you tend towards harsh and domineering language and behavior, even when you're defending the truth, you need to recognize that you're not a gentle person. You need to grow in your gentleness. Now an area that I think that this could, a second area that this could apply much more just to us and our interpersonal relationships, gentleness when helping one another in trials and in fighting sin. If your brother or sister is struggling, and they've been struggling for a long time, do you ever just kind of go, all right, come on, deal with it, let's go, let's do this, come on, get over it. Are you impatient with your brother and sister? Are you weary of their weakness? Are you bored that they still have the same prayer request? That's not the attitude of the shepherd. That's not how God deals with us. God is tender. He's gracious. He's loving. He comes to us. Now there are times where we need to push each other. So I'm not saying don't. But even the pushing, even the exhortation, even the admonishment should be done with a spirit of gentleness and humility, recognizing that we are like the servant who has been forgiven much. You may not struggle with that specific sin, that specific weakness, but that doesn't mean that you're qualified to just tell someone to get over it. We need to be gentle. We need to be tender. We need to give the gentleness and patience and tenderness to others that God has given to us. Amen? The faithful steward leads the household of God with a gentleness of spirit. So in contrast to this person who's controlled by his flesh and his pride and his own desires, faithful stewards practice self-control. He makes sure that his mind and heart are subject to the master and he gets himself in line because he loves God and he wants to honor him. That's a beautiful picture of a leader, isn't it? Isn't that the kind of man that you would hope would lead this church? But remember, we're all called to work towards this standard because we all want to hear those words, well done, good, and faithful servant. Now maybe as we've been doing this series, you've been sitting praying and saying, maybe I aspire to eldership. Maybe I want to be a leader in the church. Well after each sermon, if you're like me, you're second guessing yourself. You're seeing this high standard and you're feeling a little more like John Knox. You're afraid. You can see why he's so scared to jump into ministry. But maybe, you know, you're not looking to eldership. You're just trying to grow a little bit and still hearing this list of things that you shouldn't be and this list of things you should be, you're going, I look a lot more like the should not be than the should be. Well I want to spend some time considering how the gospel informs our pursuit of self-control. Okay? We've said that the faithful servant will display self-control, but second, the faithful servant receives self-control. If you're discouraged by your weakness, if you're discouraged by the ways that you don't measure up, I want to offer you hope. Because here's the truth, God gives you what he requires of you. What I mean when I say that is that God in his mercy and love does not expect things of his people that he won't give them all the equipping they need to do. All you need to honor God is provided by his gracious hand. Forgive the metaphor, but if the Christian life was a piece of Ikea furniture, God has given you every piece you need and he's given you the manual. You have everything you need and the beautiful thing is that the manual actually has words in it. Which for me, I need all the help I can get. We are not doing this, the expectation is not given us without the help we need. We see this in Galatians 5, turn to Galatians 5 in your Bibles. Galatians 5, now starting in verse 19, Paul is talking to the Galatians and he's going to set up some truth that should encourage us this afternoon. Starting in verse 19. Now the works of the flesh are evident. Sexual immorality, impurity, sensuality, idolatry, sorcery, enmity, strife, jealousy, fits of anger, rivalries, dissensions, divisions, envy, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these. I warn you as I warned you before that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God. So Paul is very clear, the command of God, do not live according to the flesh. And you can see that a lot of those behaviors line up with our things that an elder better not be. An elder should not be living according to the flesh. A faithful servant should not be living according to the flesh. But notice what Paul says next, starting in verse 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law and those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. If we live by the Spirit let us also keep in step with the Spirit. So look at this, the fruit of the Spirit, His work in you is the thing that He commands you to do. It includes self-control, it includes peace and gentleness, the very thing that God expects of you, He Himself works in you. He gets into your heart and He works to grow, to change you. We who are in our flesh, we're actually dead to our flesh now if you're a Christian. So you now live according to the Spirit and you don't live according to the Spirit on your own, the Spirit actually indwells you and helps you to obey. If you're saved by Jesus, He has given you His Spirit to equip you to be like Him. If you're a Christian, God Himself is in you to help you obey, to help you become self-controlled. Does this encourage you? It must encourage you. You have the best possible gift you could have. Your God loves you enough to expect you to grow. A faithful Father expects His children to grow up. He doesn't leave them where they are, but your God is also, as a faithful Father is, merciful enough to give you every help you need to achieve that growth. In fact, He Himself comes to dwell with you and make you new. Do you want to grow in your self-control? Do you want to mortify your flesh and become like your Savior? Only those who are saved by Jesus have the gift of His Spirit to work out this fruit of self-control. Now, if you see no self-control in your life, if you've been listening and you're like, this is just, I am not qualified, whatever's going on, this is not me. There are a couple reasons why that could be. First, you could be resisting the work of the Holy Spirit. Are you convicted of sin and ignoring it? Are you aware of your need to grow and just lazy and not interested in doing the work? Are you, heaven forbid, content with where you're at? Do you look around and see others and say, compared to what I'm seeing going around me, I'm doing all right? Don't stay there, Christian. Don't stay there. Repent. You must respond to conviction. You must seek out further growth. Until you are with Christ, you are not yet done being sanctified. But maybe the reality is that you're not resisting the Spirit's work because there's no Spirit in you working. If that's the case, you must repent. Let's be really clear here. You can not love God and be very self-controlled. All the self-help gurus and the CEOs and the athletes and the best academics in the world, they demonstrate that if you dedicate yourself to what you think is important, you can cut aside everything and be self-controlled and achieve much. But without Christ, you're disqualified by that first characteristic we looked at because the only reason you're doing that is for your own glory. If you don't love God, then your self-control means nothing to him. It's a dirty rag. The self-control that God requires gives him the glory because it's based on love for him. If you don't have that love, that's okay because you can ask for it right now. If you're living a life where you are desperately trying to make yourself good enough to polish yourself up to look right, you know in your heart of hearts that it's not going anywhere, that you're failing. And I can tell you, if that's where you're at, if you are trying to save yourself, if you're trying to sanctify yourself without the help of God, I've been praying that he would bring you to the end of yourself, that you would say, this is not working. I need a new heart. I need a heart that can love God because that love for God will fuel my commitment to self-control and I'll be self-controlled not for my own glory but for the glory of my Savior. Now maybe you're not trying to be self-controlled. Maybe you're rejecting self-control. Maybe you're saying, no, I'm going to live a life of indulgence that's just as common in today's culture. But the same thing is true. You will find no fulfillment in indulgence. And I'm praying for you that if that's your life that you would come to the end of yourself there as well. You would see that what you love does not satisfy. And I'm telling you, there is a love that does satisfy. It's a love that motivated God to send his Son to die for his people. And when his Son came to earth, he lived a life of perfect self-control and perfect discipline. And so he fulfilled all righteousness. There was no sin on his account. He was a perfect spotless lamb and so he offered himself up as a sacrifice for his people. And his death, his shed blood paid for sins because his righteousness was able to satisfy the wrath of God. And when Jesus was resurrected, he was resurrected to be the King and the Lord of Lords because God said he has conquered sin and death. Someone has been perfectly self-controlled and he used that self-control to save his people. Stop striving, unbeliever. If you're in this room and you're trying yourself, stop. Please acknowledge the desperation in your heart. I know what it feels like. I've been there. It's not worth it. There is a God who loves you, who is willing and able to give you a new heart and a new love so that you can be self-controlled, not for your glory, not for your own assurance of yourself, but for the glory of the God who loves you. So beg him for that love. Because the point that we're getting at is that the fruit of the Spirit grows in God's children, not perfectly, not equally, not constantly, but steadily and faithfully as we are steady and faithful to God. The gospel hope for us as struggling servants is that God wants you to have victory and he is doing everything needed so that you can have that victory. He will give you whatever it takes so that you can be who he's called you to be. So, the great question, the clarification we must make. I've just said God wants you to be self-controlled and I've also said that God gives you everything you need to be self-controlled. So if that's the case, do I just sit back and say, go ahead Lord, make me self-controlled. I will just sit here and receive the fruit. Well, if that's the case, we have a few logical problems to deal with. First of all, in our text, we're talking about qualified people. Well, all of us would be qualified for eldership if that's how it works. Now second, we have all these unnecessary commands in the Bible. If you were to look at Titus 2, you'd see that multiple times Paul tells Titus to train the people to be self-controlled. Well, if that was just something that happened, then why would we need to train for it? See, the reality is that self-control demonstrates a maturity in faith that qualifies you to lead God's people. So that leads us to our last point today. If we were to display self-control, but we also receive self-control, the final thing that faithful servants must do is practice self-control. See, the life of a faithful servant is marked by regular, consistent pursuit of self-control and of discipline. How are you going to do this? How are you going to become more self-controlled? Well, I want to give you, as we wrap up here, a few things to consider as you fight for discipline. First, you need to know your weakness. If you go to a gym and you pay way too much money for a personal trainer, the first meeting that they have with you, they figure out what are you good at, what are you bad at, what are your strengths and weaknesses? Because they need to customize a tailored plan for you to become the next strongest ever person, right? You need to know your strengths. You need to know your weaknesses. In the same way, you need to know yourself spiritually. Do you know what you need to fight? What you need to mortify? The sins in your heart that draw you away from God? The lusts of your flesh that you're most inclined to? Just look at the attributes of our list. Am I a quarreler? Am I a glutton? How? How do I fall short? What is my weakness? If you're going to grow, if you're going to change, if you're going to become better, you need to know what you're focusing on. You need to know yourself if you're going to control yourself. But that's not enough. You need to know your weakness. And second, you need to know the truth. Right? You've identified, now let's say you've done the work and you've identified what you need to grow in. You understand that you're weak. Well now what? Now you need to know the truth. You need to bring the scripture to bear on your sin. If you believe that all scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, then you need to take the scriptures up and say, Lord, how do I grow at this thing I'm weak at? How do I kill this sin? How do I become more disciplined? You need to equip yourself with a clear understanding of what God expects. I was talking to a brother a couple weeks ago and he was struggling with his sin and he said he was discouraged because he didn't feel like the Bible said anything about the thing he was struggling with. So we looked at the Bible and we found verse after verse after verse that specifically targeted what he was struggling with. And by the end, you know what he was? He was encouraged because he saw that the Lord had not just told him to do something but had told him how to do it. That's what the Word of God has and it has everything you need to grow in your self-control. So you need to know your weakness and you need to know how the Lord would equip you to fight that weakness. And then finally, you need to commit to the work. Self-control is a battle. It is hard work. Consider what Paul says in 1 Corinthians 9, 24 to 27. He says, do you not know that in a race all the runners run but only one receives the prize, so run that you may obtain it. Every athlete exercises self-control in all things. Now they do it for a perishable wreath, but we for an imperishable. So I do not run aimlessly. I don't box as one beating the air, but I discipline my body and keep it under control. Thus after preaching to others, I myself should be disqualified. Now today the Premier League plays its last game and somebody's going to get a trophy and someone's going to get kicked out of the Premier League. Now those men who play that game, they work like crazy for those trophies. Those meaningless piles of shiny metal. They're not taking that to heaven. Are they working harder than you? Self-control is hard work. If you aren't committed to it, you will fail. You have to have the help of the Spirit and you have to practice diligence. And as we said, the fuel for that commitment is your love. A love for God will help you to cast aside lesser things and to put your body under control. Listen to how Paul describes it in Philippians 2, verse 12, therefore my beloved, as you have always obeyed, so now, not only as in my presence but much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling for it is God who works in you both to will and to work for His good pleasure. Right there, we work and God works. The goal is His good pleasure. If you love God, you are desperate for His good pleasure and you will do whatever it takes. Do you want to do whatever it takes? Do you want that love? Do you have that love? Do you need that love to be stirred up in your heart again? This is why we come to church. This is why we read the Word. This is why we worship because we need to remember who we love. We need to remember the object of our worship because it fuels that discipline. It fuels that self-control. See, we're studying Titus because we want to understand what it takes for a man to be qualified as an elder in the church. And we just saw and we'll see in the future weeks the qualifications for a faithful steward of the household of God. And we see that a faithful steward must be able to master his flesh. And I ask that you would pray for the elders and for the future elders of this church that God would help them to be self-controlled men. But remember, we're all servants of God. We all need self-control. We all must aspire to this standard. Remember we talked about John Knox at the beginning? He did actually become a pastor. He came out of his room and he said, okay. He answered the call. He chose to pursue the standard that he believed that Scripture held him to. He knew his weakness. He knew the danger, but he accepted it because of his love for God and his love for God's Word and God's church. And God helped him. God preserved him and sanctified him. Listen to how a close friend summarized his character after his death. He said, John Knox was a man of God, the light of Scotland, the comfort of the church, the mirror of godliness and pattern and example to all true ministers in purity of life, soundness of doctrine, and boldness in reproving of wickedness. What a testimony. Now the same Holy Spirit who made John Knox into that man, if you are a Christian, lives in you and will help you to be sanctified, to be self-controlled, and in so doing to bring glory to our Master. There's no higher aim. So let's pray and ask him to do so in us, to make us self-controlled. Lord Jesus, thank you for this precious Word, the provision that you've given your church so that we can know what you expect of those who would lead us. But I pray for this church that you would bring up, train up, build up men who are qualified to lead, to shepherd this flock. But I pray for all of us that we would aspire to be faithful servants, that we would aspire to holiness, that we would aspire to honor you with our lives and especially as we saw today to be self-controlled. Help us to know our weakness. Help us to be able to identify in your Word what it would take for us to grow in holiness, to crucify our flesh, to mortify our sin, and to imitate your Son. And Lord, fuel our love. Help us to love you and let that love fuel our commitment to discipline, to self-control, to holiness so that you can be glorified, so that we can as your slaves make our Master's name known and glorified in the nations. We pray these things for your glory. Amen. Amen.